पर वो यह्वं पुरूणां विशां देवयतीनाम|	with words sent forth in holy hymns agni we supplicate the lord.
अग्निं सूक्तेभिर्वचोभिरीमहे यं सीमिदन्य ईळते|	of many families who duly serve the gods yea him whom others also praise.
जनासो अग्निं दधिरे सहोव्र्धं हविष्मन्तो विधेम ते|	men have won agni him who makes their strength abound we with oblations worship thee.
स तवं नो अद्य सुमना इहाविता भवा वाजेषु सन्त्य|	our graciousminded helper in our deeds of might be thou o excellent this day.
पर तवा दूतं वर्णीमहे होतारं विश्ववेदसम|	thee for our messenger we choose thee the omniscient for our priest.
महस्ते सतो वि चरन्त्यर्चयो दिवि सप्र्शन्ति भानवः|	the flames of thee the mighty are spread wide around thy splendour reaches to the sky.
देवासस्त्वा वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा सं दूतं परत्नमिन्धते|	the gods enkindle thee their ancient messengervaruṇa mitra aryaman.
विश्वं सो अग्ने जयति तवया धनं यस्ते ददाश मर्त्यः|	that mortal man o agni gains through thee all wealth who hath poured offerings unto thee.
मन्द्रो होता गर्हपतिरग्ने दूतो विशामसि|	thou agni art a cheering priest lord of the house mens messenger.
तवे विश्वा संगतानि वरता धरुवा यानि देवा अक्र्ण्वत|	all constant high decrees established by the gods gathered together meet in thee.
तवे इदग्ने सुभगे यविष्ठ्य विश्वमा हूयते हविः|	in thee the auspicious one o agni youthfullest each sacred gift is offered up.
सत्वं नो अद्य सुमना उतापरं यक्षि देवान सुवीर्या|	this day and after gracious worship thou our gods that we may have heroic sons.
तं घेमित्था नमस्विन उप सवराजमासते|	to him in his own splendour bright draw near in worship the devout.
होत्राभिरग्निं मनुषः समिन्धते तितिर्वांसो अति सरिधः|	men kindle agni with their sacrificial gifts victorious oer the enemies.
घनन्तो वर्त्रमतरन रोदसी अप उरु कषयाय चक्रिरे|	vṛtra they smote and slew and made the earth and heaven and firmament a wide abode.
भुवत कण्वे वर्षा दयुम्न्याहुतः करन्ददश्वो गविष्टिषु|	the glorious bull invoked hath stood at kaṇvas side loud neighed the steed in frays for kine.
सं सीदस्व महानसि शोचस्व देववीतमः|	seat thee for thou art mighty shine best entertainer of the gods.
वि धूममग्ने अरुषं मियेध्य सर्ज परशस्त दर्शतम|	worthy of sacred food praised agni loose the smoke ruddy and beautiful to see.
यं तवा देवासो मनवे दधुरिह यजिष्ठं हव्यवाहन|	bearer of offerings whom best sacrificing priest the gods for manus sake ordained.
यं कण्वो मेध्यातिथिर्धनस्प्र्तं यं वर्षा यमुपस्तुतः|	whom kaṇva whom medhyātithi made the source of wealth and vṛṣan and upastuta.
यमग्निं मेध्यातिथिः कण्व ईध रतादधि|	him agni whom medhyātithi whom kaṇva kindled for his rite.
तस्य परेषो दीदियुस्तमिमा रचस्तमग्निं वर्धयामसि|	him these our songs of praise him agni we extol his powers shine out preeminent.
रायस पूर्धि सवधावोअस्ति हि तेअग्ने देवेष्वाप्यम|	make our wealth perfect thou o agni lord divine for thou hast kinship with the gods.
तवंवाजस्य शरुत्यस्य राजसि स नो मर्ळ महानसि|	thou rulest as a king oer widelyfamous strength be good to us for thou art great.
ऊर्ध्व ऊ षु ण ऊतये तिष्ठा देवो न सविता|	stand up erect to lend us aid stand up like savitar the god.
ऊर्ध्वोवाजस्य सनिता यदञ्जिभिर्वाघद्भिर्विह्वयामहे|	erect as strengthbestower we call aloud with unguents and with priests on thee.
ऊर्ध्वो नः पाह्यंहसो नि केतुना विश्वं समत्रिणं दह|	erect preserve us from sore trouble with thy flame burn thou each ravening demon dead.
कर्धी न ऊर्ध्वाञ्चरथाय जीवसे विदा देवेषु नो दुवः|	raise thou us up that we may walk and live so thou shalt find our worship mid the gods.
पाहि नो अग्ने रक्षसः पाहि धूर्तेरराव्णः|	preserve us agni from the fiend preserve us from malicious wrong.
पाहि रीषत उत वा जिघांसतो बर्हद्भानो यविष्ठ्य|	save us from him who fain would injure us or slay most youthful thou with lofty light.
घनेव विष्वग वि जह्यराव्णस्तपुर्जम्भ यो अस्मध्रुक|	smite down as with a club thou who hast fire for teeth smite thou the wicked right and left.
यो मर्त्यः शिशीते अत्यक्तुभिर्मा नः स रिपुरीशत|	let not the man who plots against us in the night nor any foe prevail oer us.
अग्निर्वव्ने सुवीर्यमग्निः कण्वाय सौभगम|	agni hath given heroic might to kaṇva and felicity.
अग्निः परावन मित्रोत मेध्यातिथिमग्निः साता उपस्तुतम|	agni hath helped our friends hath helped medhyātithi hath helped upastuta to win.
अग्निना तुर्वशं यदुं परावत उग्रादेवं हवामहे|	we call on ugradeva yadu turvaśa by means of agni from afar.
अग्निर्नयन नववास्त्वं बर्हद्रथं तुर्वीतिं दस्यवे सहः|	agni bring navavāstva and bṛhadratha turvīti to subdue the foe.
नि तवामग्ने मनुर्दधे जयोतिर्जनाय शश्वते|	manu hath stablished thee a light agni for all the race of men.
दीदेथ कण्व रतजात उक्षितो यं नमस्यन्ति कर्ष्टयः|	sprung from the law oilfed for kaṇva hast thou blazed thou whom the people reverence.
तवेषासो अग्नेरमवन्तो अर्चयो भीमासो न परतीतये|	the flames of agni full of splendour and of might are fearful not to be approached.
रक्षस्विनः सदमिद यातुमावतो विश्वं समत्रिणं दह|	consume for ever all demons and sorcerers consume thou each devouring fiend.
इन्द्रमिद गाथिनो बर्हदिन्द्रमर्केभिरर्किणः|	indra the singers with high praise indra reciters with their lauds.
इन्द्रं वाणीरनूषत|	indra the choirs have glorified.
इन्द्र इद धर्योः सचा सम्मिश्ल आ वचोयुजा|	indra hath ever close to him his two bay steeds and wordyoked car.
इन्द्रो वज्रीहिरण्ययः|	indra the golden thunderarmed.
इन्द्रो दीर्घाय चक्षस आ सूर्यं रोहयद दिवि|	indra hath raised the sun on high in heaven that he may see afar.
वि गोभिरद्रिमैरयत|	he burst the mountain for the kine.
इन्द्र वाजेषु नोअव सहस्रप्रधनेषु च|	help us o indra in the frays yea frays where thousand spoils are gained.
उग्र उग्राभिरूतिभिः|	with awful aids o awful one.
इन्द्रं वयं महाधन इन्द्रमर्भे हवामहे|	in mighty battle we invoke indra indra in lesser fight.
युजं वर्त्रेषु वज्रिणम|	the friend who bends his bolt at fiends.
स नो वर्षन्नमुं चरुं सत्रादावन्नपा वर्धि|	unclose our manly hero thou for ever bounteous yonder cloud.
अस्मभ्यमप्रतिष्कुतः|	for us thou irresistible.
तुञ्जेतुञ्जे य उत्तरे सतोमा इन्द्रस्य वज्रिणः|	still higher at each strain of mine thunderarmed indras praises rise.
न विन्धेस्य सुष्टुतिम|	i find no laud worthy of him.
वर्षा यूथेव वंसगः कर्ष्टीरियर्त्योजसा|	even as the bull drives on the herds he drives the people with his might.
ईशानो अप्रतिष्कुतः|	the ruler irresistible.
य एकश्चर्षणीनां वसूनामिरज्यति|	indra who rules with single sway men riches and the fivefold race.
इन्द्रः पञ्च कसितीनाम|	of those who dwell upon the earth.
इन्द्रं वो विश्वतस परि हवामहे जनेभ्यः|	for your sake from each side we call indra away from other men.
अस्माकमस्तु केवलः|	ours and none others may he be.
अग्निमीळे पुरोहितं यज्ञस्य देवं रत्वीजम|	i laud agni the chosen priest god minister of sacrifice.
होतारं रत्नधातमम|	the hotar lavishest of wealth.
अग्निः पूर्वेभिर्र्षिभिरीड्यो नूतनैरुत|	worthy is agni to be praised by living as by ancient seers.
स देवानेह वक्षति|	he shall bring hitherward the gods.
अग्निना रयिमश्नवत पोषमेव दिवेदिवे|	through agni man obtaineth wealth yea plenty waxing day by day.
यशसं वीरवत्तमम|	most rich in heroes glorious.
अग्ने यं यज्ञमध्वरं विश्वतः परिभूरसि|	agni the perfect sacrifice which thou encompassest about.
स इद्देवेषु गछति|	verily goeth to the gods.
अग्निर्होता कविक्रतुः सत्यश्चित्रश्रवस्तमः|	may agni sapientminded priest truthful most gloriously great.
देवो देवेभिरा गमत|	the god come hither with the gods.
यदङग दाशुषे तवमग्ने भद्रं करिष्यसि|	whatever blessing agni thou wilt grant unto thy worshipper.
तवेत तत सत्यमङगिरः|	that aṅgiras is indeed thy truth.
उप तवाग्ने दिवेदिवे दोषावस्तर्धिया वयम|	to thee dispeller of the night o agni day by day with prayer.
नमो भरन्त एमसि|	bringing thee reverence we come.
राजन्तमध्वराणां गोपां रतस्य दीदिविम|	ruler of sacrifices guard of law eternal radiant one.
वर्धमानंस्वे दमे|	increasing in thine own abode.
स नः पितेव सूनवेअग्ने सूपायनो भव|	be to us easy of approach even as a father to his son.
सचस्वा नः सवस्तये|	agni be with us for our weal.
गायत साम नभन्यं यथा वेरर्चाम तद वाव्र्धानं सवर्वत|	the praisesong let him sing forth bursting birdlike sing we that hymn which like heavens light expandeth.
गावो धेनवो बर्हिष्यदब्धा आ यत सद्मानं दिव्यं विवासान|	that the milkgiving cows may unimpeded call to the sacred grass the gods assembly.
अर्चद वर्षा वर्षभिः सवेदुहव्यैर्म्र्गो नाश्नो अति यज्जुगुर्यात|	let the bull sing with bulls whose toil is worship with a loud roar like some wild beast that hungers.
पर मन्दयुर्मनां गूर्त होता भरते मर्यो मिथुना यजत्रः|	praised god the glad priest brings his hearts devotion the holy youth presents twofold oblation.
नक्षद धोता परि सद्म मिता यन भरद गर्भमा शरदः पर्थिव्याः|	may the priest come circling the measured stations and with him bring the earths autumnal fruitage.
करन्ददश्वो नयमानो रुवद गौरन्तर्दूतो न रोदसी चरद वाक|	let the horse neigh led near let the steer bellow let the voice go between both worlds as herald.
ता कर्माषतरास्मै पर चयौत्नानि देवयन्तो भरन्ते|	to him we offer welcomest oblations the pious bring their strengthinspiring praises.
जुजोषदिन्द्रो दस्मवर्चा नासत्येव सुग्म्यो रथेष्ठाः|	may indra wondrous in his might accept them carborne and swift to move like the nāsatyas.
तमु षटुहीन्द्रं यो ह सत्वा यः शूरो मघवा यो रथेष्ठाः|	praise thou that indra who is truly mighty the carborne warrior maghavan the hero.
परतीचश्चिद योधीयान वर्षण्वान ववव्रुषश्चित तमसो विहन्ता|	stronger in war than those who fight against him borne by strong steeds who kills enclosing darkness.
पर यदित्था महिना नर्भ्यो अस्त्यरं रोदसी कक्ष्ये नास्मै|	him who surpasses heroes in his greatness the earth and heavens suffice not for his girdles.
सं विव्य इन्द्रो वर्जनं न भूमा भर्ति सवधावानोपशमिव दयाम|	indra endues the earth to be his garment and godlike wears the heaven as twere a frontlet.
समत्सु तवा शूर सतामुराणं परपथिन्तमं परितंसयध्यै|	thee hero guardian of the brave in battles who roamest in the vanto draw thee hither.
सजोषस इन्द्रं मदे कषोणीः सूरिं चिद ये अनुमदन्ति वाजैः|	indra the hosts agree beside the soma and joy for his great actions in the chieftain.
एवा हि ते शं सवना समुद्र आपो यत त आसु मदन्ति देवीः|	libations in the sea to thee are pleasant when thy divine floods come to cheer these people.
विश्वा ते अनु जोष्या भूद गौः सूरींश्चिद यदि धिषा वेषि जनान|	to thee the cow is sum of all things grateful when with the wish thou seekest men and princes.
असाम यथा सुषखाय एन सवभिष्टयो नरां न शंसैः|	so may we in this one be well befriended well aided as it were through praise of chieftains.
असद यथा न इन्द्रो वन्दनेष्ठास्तुरो न कर्म नयमान उक्था|	that indra still may linger at our worship as one led swift to work to hear our praises.
विष्पर्धसो नरां न शंसैरस्माकासदिन्द्रो वज्रहस्तः|	like men in rivalry extolling princes our friend be indra wielder of the thunder.
मित्रायुवो न पूर्पतिं सुशिष्टौ मध्यायुव उप शिक्षन्ति यज्ञैः|	like true friends of some citys lord within them held in good rule with sacrifice they help him.
यज्ञो हि षमेन्द्रं कश्चिद रन्धञ जुहुराणश्चिन मनसापरियन|	for every sacrifice makes indra stronger yea when he goes around angry in spirit.
तीर्थे नाछा तात्र्षाणमोको दीर्घो न सिध्रमा कर्णोत्यध्वा|	as pleasure at the ford invites the thirsty as the long way brings him who gains his object.
मो षू ण इन्द्रात्र पर्त्सु देवैरस्ति हि षमा ते शुष्मिन्नवयाः|	let us not here contend with gods o indra for here o mighty one is thine own portion.
महश्चिद यस्य मीळ्हुषो यव्या हविष्मतो मरुतोवन्दते गीः|	the great whose friends the bounteous maruts honour as with a stream his song who pours oblations.
एष सतोम इन्द्र तुभ्यमस्मे एतेन गातुं हरिवो विदो नः|	addressed to thee is this our praise o indra lord of bay steeds find us hereby advancement.
आ नो वव्र्त्याः सुविताय देव विद्यामेषं व ज|	so mayst thou lead us on o god to comfort may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
सोमानं सवरणं कर्णुहि बरह्मणस पते|	o brĀhmaṆaspati make him who presses soma glorious.
कक्षीवन्तं याुशिजः|	even kakṣīvān auśija.
यो रेवान यो अमीवहा वसुवित पुष्टिवर्धनः|	the rich the healer of disease who giveth wealth increaseth store.
स नः सिषक्तु यस्तुरः|	the promptmay he be with us still.
मा नः शंसो अररुषो धूर्तिः परणं मर्त्यस्य|	let not the foemans curse let not a mortals onslaught fall on us.
रक्षा णो बरह्मणस पते|	preserve us brahmaṇaspati.
स घा वीरो न रिष्यति यमिन्द्रो बरह्मणस पतिः|	neer is the mortal hero harmed whom indra brahmaṇaspati.
सोमो हिनोति मर्त्यम|	and soma graciously inspire.
तवं तं बरह्मणस पते सोम इन्द्रश्च मर्त्यम|	do thou o brahmaṇaspati and indra soma dakṣiṇā.
दक्षिणा पात्वंहसः|	preserve that mortal from distress.
सदसस पतिमद्भुतं परियमिन्द्रस्य काम्यम|	to the assemblys wondrous lord to indras lovely friend who gives.
सनिं मेधामयासिषम|	wisdom have i drawn near in prayer.
यस्माद रते न सिध्यति यज्ञो विपश्चितश्चन|	he without whom no sacrifice een of the wise man prospers he.
स धीनां योगमिन्वति|	stirs up the series of thoughts.
आद रध्नोति हविष्क्र्तिं पराञ्चं कर्णोत्यध्वरम|	he makes the oblation prosper he promotes the course of sacrifice.
होत्रा देवेषु गछति|	our voice of praise goes to the gods.
नराशंसं सुध्र्ष्टममपश्यं सप्रथस्तमम|	i have seen narāśaṁsa him most resolute most widely famed.
दिवो नसद्ममखसम|	as twere the household priest of heaven.
कदु परेष्टाविषां रयीणामध्वर्यन्ता यदुन्निनीथोपाम|	what dearest pair is this in strength and riches that ye as priests are bring from the waters.
अयं वां यज्ञो अक्र्त परशस्तिं वसुधिती अवितारा जनानाम|	this sacrifice is your glorification ye who protect mankind and give them treasures.
आ वामश्वासः शुचयः पयस्पा वातरंहसो दिव्यासो अत्याः|	may your pure steeds raindrinkers bring you hither swift as the tempest your celestial coursers.
मनोजुवो वर्षणो वीतप्र्ष्ठा एह सवराजो अश्विनावहन्तु|	rapid as thought with fair backs full of vigour resplendent in their native light o aśvins.
आ वां रथोअवनिर्न परवत्वान सर्प्रवन्धुरः सुविताय गम्याः|	your car is like a torrent rushing downward may it come nigh broadseated for our welfare.
वर्ष्ण सथातारा मनसो जवीयानहम्पूर्वो यजतोधिष्ण्या यः|	car holy strong that ever would be foremost thoughtswift which ye for whom we long have mounted.
इहेह जाता समवावशीतामरेपसा तन्वा नामभिः सवैः|	here sprung to life they both have sung together with bodies free from stain with signs that mark them.
जिष्णुर्वामन्यः सुमखस्य सूरिर्दिवो अन्यः सुभगः पुत्र ऊहे|	one of you prince of sacrifice the victor the other counts as heavens auspicious offspring.
पर वां निचेरुः ककुहो वशाननु पिशङगरूपः सदनानि गम्याः|	may your carseat downgliding goldencoloured according to your wish approach our dwellings.
हरी अन्यस्य पीपयन्त वाजैर्मथ्रा रजांस्यश्विना वि घोषैः|	men shall feed full the bay steeds of the other and aśvins they with roars shall stir the regions.
पर वां शरद्वान वर्षभो न निष्षाट पूर्वीरिषश्चरति मध्व इष्णन|	forth comes your strong bull like a cloud of autumn sending abundant food of liquid sweetness.
एवैरन्यस्य पीपयन्त वाजैर्वेषन्तीरूर्ध्वा नद्यो न आगुः|	let them feed with the others ways and vigour the upper streams have come and do us service.
असर्जि वां सथविरा वेधसा गीर्बाळ्हे अश्विना तरेधा कषरन्ती|	your constant song hath been sent forth disposers that flows threefold in mighty strength o aśvins.
उपस्तुताववतं नाधमानं यामन्नयामञ्छ्र्णुतं हवं मे|	thus lauded give the suppliant protection moving or resting hear mine invocation.
उत सया वां रुशतो वप्ससो गीस्त्रिबर्हिषि सदसि पिन्वतेनॄन|	this song of bright contents for you is swelling in the mens hall where threefold grass is ready.
वर्षा वां मेघो वर्षणा पीपाय गोर्न सेके मनुषोदशस्यन|	your strong raincloud ye mighty ones hath swollen honouring men as twere with milks outpouring.
युवां पूषेवाश्विना पुरन्धिरग्निमुषां न जरते हविष्मान|	the prudent worshipper like pūṣan aśvins praises you as he praises dawn and agni.
हुवे यद वां वरिवस्या गर्णानो वि|	when singing with devotion he invokes you may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
स परत्नथा सहसा जायमानः सद्यः काव्यानि बळ अधत्त विश्वा|	he in the ancient way by strength engendered lo straight hath taken to himself all wisdom.
अपश्च मित्रं धिषणा च साधन देवा अग्निन्धारयन दरविणोदाम|	the waters and the bowl have made him friendly the gods possessed the wealth bestowing agni.
स पूर्वया निविदा कव्यतायोरिमाः परजा अजनयन मनूनाम|	at Āyus ancient call he by his wisdom gave all this progeny of men their being.
विवस्वता चक्षसा दयामपश्च देवा अ ध द|	and by refulgent light heaven and the waters the gods possessed the wealth bestowing agni.
तमीळत परथमं यज्ञसाधं विश आरीराहुतं रञ्जसानम|	praise him ye Āryan folk as chief performer of sacrifice adored and ever toiling.
ऊर्जः पुत्रं भरतं सर्प्रदानुं देवा|	welltended son of strength the constant giver the gods possessed the wealth bestowing agni.
स मातरिश्वा पुरुवारपुष्टिर्विदद गातुं तनयाय सवर्वित|	that mātariśvan rich in wealth and treasure lightwinner finds a pathway for his offspring.
विशां गोपा जनिता रोदस्योर्देवा|	guard of our folk father of earth and heaven the gods possessed the wealth bestowing agni.
नक्तोषासा वर्णमामेम्याने धापयेते शिशुमेकं समीची|	night and dawn changing each the others colour meeting together suckle one same infant.
दयावाक्षामा रुक्मो अन्तर्वि भाति देवा|	golden between the heaven and earth he shineth the gods possessed the wealth bestowing agni.
रायो बुध्नः संगमनो वसूनां यज्ञस्य केतुर्मन्मसाधनो वेः|	root of wealth gatheringplace of treasures banner of sacrifice who grants the suppliants wishes.
अम्र्तत्वं रक्षमाणास एनं देवा|	preserving him as their own life immortal the gods possessed the wealthbestowing agni.
नू च पुरा च सदनं रयीणां जातस्य च जायमानस्य च कषाम|	now and of old the home of wealth the mansion of what is born and what was born aforetime.
सतश्च गोपां भवतश्च भूरेर्देवा|	guard of what is and what will be hereafterthe gods possessed the wealth bestowing agni.
दरविणोदा दरविणसस्तुरस्य दरविणोदाः सनरस्य पर यंसत|	may the wealthgiver grant us conquering riches may the wealthgiver grant us wealth with heroes.
दरविणोदा वीरवतीमिषं नो दरविणोदा रसते दीर्घमायुः|	may the wealthgiver grant us food with offspring and length of days may the wealthgiver send us.
एवा नो अग्ने समिधा वर्धानो रेवत पावक शरवसे वि भाहि|	fed with our fuel purifying agni so blaze to us auspiciously for glory.
तन नो मित्रो वरुणो मामहन्ताम अदितिः सिन्धुः पर्थ्विवी उतो दयौः|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
किमु शरेष्ठः किं यविष्ठो न आजगन किमीयते दूत्यं कद यदूचिम|	why hath the best why hath the youngest come to us upon what embassy comes he what have we said.
न निन्दिम चमसं यो महाकुलोअग्ने भरातर्द्रुण इद भूतिमूदिम|	we have not blamed the chalice of illustrious birth we brother agni praised the goodness of the wood.
एकं चमसं चतुरः कर्णोतन तद वो देवा अब्रुवन तद व आगमम|	the chalice that is single make ye into four thus have the gods commanded therefore am i come.
सौधन्वना यद्येवा करिष्यथ साकं देवैर्यज्ञियासो भविष्यथ|	if o sudhanvans children ye will do this thing ye shall participate in sacrifice with gods.
अग्निं दूतं परति यदब्रवीतनाश्वः कर्त्वो रथ उतेह कर्त्वः|	what to the envoy agni in reply ye spake a courser must be made a chariot fashioned here.
धेनुः कर्त्वा युवशा कर्त्वा दवा तानि भरातरनु वः कर्त्व्येमसि|	a cow must be created and the twain made young when we have done these things brother we turn to you.
चक्र्वांस रभवस्तदप्र्छत कवेदभूद यः सय दूतो न आजगन|	when thus o Ṛbhus ye had done ye questioned thus whither went he who came to us a messenger.
यदावाख्यच्चमसाञ्चतुरः कर्तानादित तवष्टा गनास्वन्तर्न्यानजे|	then tvaṣṭar when he viewed the four wrought chalices concealed himself among the consorts of the gods.
हनामैनानिति तवष्टा यदब्रवीच्चमसं ये देवपानमनिन्दिषुः|	as tvaṣṭar thus had spoken let us slay these men who have reviled the chalice drinkingcup of gods.
अन्या नामानि कर्ण्वते सुते सचानन्यैरेनान्कन्या नामभि सपरत|	they gave themselves new names when soma juice was shed and under these new names the maiden welcomed them.
इन्द्रो हरी युयुजे अश्विना रथं बर्हस्पतिर्विश्वरूपामुपाजत|	indra hath yoked his bays the aśvins car is horsed bṛhaspati hath brought the cow of every hue.
रभुर्विभ्वा वाजो देवानगछत सवपसो यज्ञियम्भागमैतन|	ye went as Ṛbhus vibhvan vāja to the gods and skilled in war obtained your share in sacrifice.
निश्चर्मणो गामरिणीत धीतिभिर्या जरन्ता युवशा ताक्र्णोतन|	ye by your wisdom brought a cow from out a hide unto that ancient pair ye gave again their youth.
सौधन्वना अश्वादश्वमतक्षत युक्त्वा रथमुप देवानयातन|	out of a horse sudhanvans sons ye formed a horse a chariot ye equipped and went unto the gods.
इदमुदकं पिबतेत्यब्रवीतनेदं वा घा पिबता मुञ्जनेजनम|	drink ye this water were the words ye spake to them or drink ye this the rinsing of the muñjagrass.
सौधन्वना यदि तन नेव हर्यथ तर्तीये घ सवने मादयाध्वै|	if ye approve not even this sudhanvans sons then at the third libation gladden ye yourselves.
आपो भूयिष्ठा इत्येको अब्रवीदग्निर्भूयिष्ठ इत्यन्यो अब्रवीत|	most excellent are waters thus said one of you most excellent is agni thus another said.
वधर्यन्तीं बहुभ्यः परैको अब्रवीद रता वदन्तश्चमसानपिंशत|	another praised to many a one the lightning cloud then did ye shape the cups speaking the words of truth.
शरोणामेक उदकं गामवजति मांसमेकः पिंशति सूनयाभ्र्तम|	one downward to the water drives the crippled cow another trims the flesh brought on the carvingboard.
आ निम्रुचः शक्र्देको अपभरत किं सवित पुत्रेभ्यः पितरा उपावतुः|	one carries off the refuse at the set of sun how did the parents aid their children in their task.
उद्वत्स्वस्मा अक्र्णोतन तर्णं निवत्स्वपः सवपस्यय नरः|	on the high places ye have made the grass for man and water in the valleys by your skill o men.
अगोह्यस्य यदसस्तना गर्हे तदद्येदं रभवो नानु गछथ|	Ṛbhus ye iterate not today that act of yours your sleeping in the house of him whom naught can hide.
सम्मील्य यद भुवना पर्यसर्पत कव सवित तात्या पितर वासतुः|	as compassing them round ye glided through the worlds where had the venerable parents their abode.
अशपत यः करस्नं व अददे यः पराब्रवीत परोतस्म अब्रवीतन|	ye laid a curse on him who raised his arm at you to him who spake aloud to you ye spake again.
सुषुप्वांस रभवस्तदप्र्छतागोह्य क इदं नो अबूबुधत|	when ye had slept your fill ye Ṛbhus thus ye asked o thou whom naught may hide who now hath wakened us.
शवानं बस्तो बोधयितारमब्रवीत सम्वत्सर इदमद्या वयख्यत|	the goat declared the hound to be your wakener that day in a full year ye first unclosed our eyes.
दिवा यन्ति मरुतो भूम्याग्निरयं वातो अन्तरिक्षेण यति|	the maruts move in heaven on earth this agni through the midfirmament the wind approaches.
अद्भिर्यति वरुणः समुद्रैर्युष्मानिछन्तः शवसो नपातः|	varuṇa comes in the seas gathered waters o sons of strength desirous of your presence.
चन्द्रमा अप्स्वन्तरा सुपर्णो धावते दिवि|	within the waters runs the moon he with the beauteous wings in heaven.
न वो हिरण्यनेमयः पदं विन्दन्ति विद्युतो वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी|	ye lightnings with your golden wheels men find not your abidingplace mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
अर्थमिद वा उ अर्थिन आ जाया युवते पतिम|	surely men crave and gain their wish close to her husband clings the wife.
तुञ्जाते वर्ष्ण्यं पयः परिदाय रसं दुहे वित्तम|	and in embraces intertwined both give and take the bliss of love mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
मो षु देव अदः सवरव पादि दिवस परि|	o never may that light ye gods fall from its station in the sky.
मा सोम्यस्य शम्भुवः शूने भूम कदा चन वित्तम|	neer fail us one like soma sweet the spring of our felicity mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
यज्ञं पर्छाम्यवमं स तद दूतो वि वोचति|	i ask the last of sacrifice as envoy he shall tell it forth.
कव रतं पूर्व्यं गतं कस्तद बिभर्ति नूतनो वि|	where is the ancient law divine who is its new diffuser now mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
अमी ये देवा सथन तरिष्वा रोचने दिवः|	ye gods who yonder have your home in the three lucid realms of heaven.
कद व रतं कदन्र्तं कव परत्ना व आहुतिर्वि|	what count ye truth and what untruth where is mine ancient call on you mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
कद व रतस्य धर्णसि कद वरुणस्य चक्षणम|	what is your firm support of law what varuṇas observant eye.
कदर्यम्णो महस पथाति करामेम दूढ्यो वि|	how may we pass the wicked on the path of mighty aryaman mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
अहम सो अस्मि यः पुरा सुते वदामि कानि चित|	i am the man who sang of old full many a laud when soma flowed.
तं मा वयन्त्याध्यो वर्को न तर्ष्णजं मर्गं वि|	yet torturing cares consume me as the wolf assails the thirsty deer mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
सं मा तपन्त्यभितः सपत्नीरिव पर्शवः|	like rival wives on every side enclosing ribs oppress me sore.
मूषो न शिश्ना वयदन्ति माध्य सतोतारं ते शतक्रतो वि|	o Śatakratu biting cares devour me singer of thy praise as rats devour the weavers threads mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
अमी ये सप्त रश्मयस्तत्रा मे नाभिरातता|	where those seven rays are shining thence my home and family extend.
तरितस्तद वेदाप्त्यः स जामित्वाय रेभति वि|	this tṛta Āptya knoweth well and speaketh out for brotherhood mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
अमी ये पञ्चोक्षणो मध्ये तस्थुर्महो दिवः|	may those five bulls which stand on high full in the midst of mighty heaven.
देवत्रा नु परवाच्यं सध्रीचीना नि वाव्र्तुर्वि|	having together swiftly borne my praises to the gods return mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
सुपर्णा एत आसते मध्य आरोधने दिवः|	high in the mid ascent of heaven those birds of beauteous pinion sit.
ते सेधन्ति पथो वर्कं तरन्तं यह्वतीरपो वि|	back from his path they drive the wolf as he would cross the restless floods mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
नव्यं तदुक्थ्यं हितं देवासः सुप्रवाचनम|	firm is this newwrought hymn of praise and meet to be told forth o gods.
रतमर्षन्ति सिन्धवः सत्यं तातान सूर्यो वि|	the flowing of the floods is law truth is the suns extended light mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
अग्ने तव तयदुक्थ्यं देवेष्वस्त्याप्यम|	worthy of laud o agni is that kinship which thou hast with gods.
स नः सत्तो मनुष्वदा देवान यक्षि विदुष्टरो वि|	here seat thee like a man most wise bring thou the gods for sacrifice mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
सत्तो होता मनुष्वदा देवानछा विदुष्टरः|	here seated manlike as a priest shall wisest agni to the gods.
अग्निर्हव्या सुषूदति देवो देवेषु मेधिरो वि|	speed onward our oblations god among the gods intelligent mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
बरह्मा कर्णोति वरुणो गातुविदं तमीमहे|	varuṇa makes the holy prayer to him who finds the path we pray.
वयूर्णोति हर्दा मतिं नव्यो जायतां रतं वि|	he in the heart reveals his thought let sacred worship rise anew mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
असौ यः पन्था आदित्यो दिवि परवाच्यं कर्तः|	that pathway of the sun in heaven made to be highly glorified.
न स देवा अतिक्रमे तं मर्तासो न पश्यथ वि|	is not to be transgressed o gods o mortals ye behold it not mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
तरितः कूपेअवहितो देवान हवत ऊतये|	tṛta when buried in the well calls on the gods to succour him.
तच्छुश्राव बर्हस्पतिः कर्ण्वन्नंहूरणादुरु वि|	that call of his bṛhaspati heard and released him from distress mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
अरुणो मा सक्र्द वर्कः पथा यन्तं ददर्श हि|	a ruddy wolf beheld me once as i was faring on my path.
उज्जिहीते निचाय्या तष्टेव पर्ष्ट्यामयी वि|	he like a carpenter whose back is aching crouched and slunk away mark this my woe ye earth and heaven.
एनाङगूषेण वयमिन्द्रवन्तोअभि षयाम वर्जने सर्ववीराः|	through this our song may we allied with indra with all our heroes conquer in the battle.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
पर ये शुम्भन्ते जनयो न सप्तयो यामन रुद्रस्य सूनवःसुदंससः|	they who are glancing forth like women on their way doers of mighty deeds swift racers rudras sons.
रोदसी हि मरुतश्चक्रिरे वर्धे मदन्ति वीरा विदथेषु घर्ष्वयः|	the maruts have made heaven and earth increase and grow in sacrifices they delight the strong and wild.
त उक्षितासो महिमानमाशत दिवि रुद्रासो अधि चक्रिरे सदः|	grown to their perfect strength greatness have they attained the rudras have established their abode in heaven.
अर्चन्तो अर्कं जनयन्त इन्द्रियमधि शरियो दधिरे पर्श्निमातरः|	singing their song of praise and generating might they have put glory on the sons whom pṛśni bare.
गोमातरो यच्छुभयन्ते अञ्जिभिस्तनूषु शुभ्रा दधिरे विरुक्मतः|	when children of the cow they shine in bright attire and on their fair limbs lay their golden ornaments.
बाधन्ते विश्वमभिमातिनमप वर्त्मान्येषामनु रीयते घर्तम|	they drive away each adversary from their path and following their traces fatness floweth down.
वि ये भराजन्ते सुमखास रष्टिभिः परच्यावयन्तो अच्युताचिदोजसा|	when mighty warriors ye who glitter with your spears oerthrowing with your strength een what is neer oerthrown.
मनोजुवो यन मरुतो रथेष्वा वर्षव्रातासः पर्षतीरयुग्ध्वम|	when o ye maruts ye the host that send the rain had harnessed to your cars the thoughtfleet spotted deer.
पर यद रथेषु पर्षतीरयुग्ध्वं वाजे अद्रिं मरुतो रंहयन्तः|	when ye have harnessed to your cars the spotted deer urging the thunderbolt o maruts to the fray.
उतारुषस्य वि षयन्ति धाराश्चर्मेवोदभिर्व्युन्दन्ति भूम|	forth rush the torrents of the dark red stormy cloud and moisten like a skin the earth with waterfloods.
आ वो वहन्तु सप्तयो रघुष्यदो रघुपत्वानः पर जिगात बाहुभिः|	let your swiftgliding coursers bear you hitherward with their fleet pinions come ye forward with your arms.
सीदता बर्हिरुरु वः सदस कर्तं मादयध्वं मरुतो मध्वो अन्धसः|	sit on the grass a wide seat hath been made for you delight yourselves o maruts in the pleasant food.
तेअवर्धन्त सवतवसो महित्वना नाकं तस्थुरुरु चक्रिरे सदः|	strong in their native strength to greatness have they grown stepped to the firmament and made their dwelling wide.
विष्णुर्यद धावद वर्षणं मदच्युतं वयो न सीदन्नधि बर्हिषि परिये|	when viṣṇu saved the soma bringing wild delight the maruts sate like birds on their dear holy grass.
शूरा इवेद युयुधयो न जग्मयः शरवस्यवो न पर्तनासु येतिरे|	in sooth like heroes fain for fight they rush about like combatants fameseeking have they striven in war.
भयन्ते विश्वा भुवना मरुद्भ्यो राजान इव तवेषसन्द्र्शो नरः|	before the maruts every creature is afraid the men are like to kings terrible to behold.
तवष्टा यद वज्रं सुक्र्तं हिरण्ययं सहस्रभ्र्ष्टिं सवपा अवर्तयत|	when tvaṣṭar deft of hand had turned the thunderbolt golden with thousand edges fashioned more skilfully.
धत्त इन्द्रो नर्यपांसि कर्तवेअहन वर्त्रं निरपामौब्जदर्णवम|	indra received it to perform heroic deeds vṛtra he slew and forced the flood of water forth.
ऊर्ध्वं नुनुद्रेअवतं त ओजसा दद्र्हाणं चिद बिभिदुर्विपर्वतम|	they with their vigorous strength pushed the well up on high and clove the cloud in twain though it was passing strong.
धमन्तो वाणं मरुतः सुदानवो मदे सोमस्य रण्यानि चक्रिरे|	the maruts bounteous givers sending forth their voice in the wild joy of soma wrought their glorious deeds.
जिह्मं नुनुद्रेअवतं तया दिशासिञ्चन्नुत्सं गोतमाय तर्ष्णजे|	they drave the cloud transverse directed hitherward and poured the fountain forth for thirsting gotama.
आ गछन्तीमवसा चित्रभानवः कामं विप्रस्यतर्पयन्त धामभिः|	shining with varied light they come to him with help they with their might fulfilled the longing of the sage.
या वः शर्म शशमानाय सन्ति तरिधातूनि दाशुषे यछताधि|	the shelters which ye have for him who lauds you bestow them threefold on the man who offers.
अस्मभ्यं तानि मरुतो वि यन्त रयिं नो धत्त वर्षणः सुवीरम|	extend the same boons unto us ye maruts give us o heroes wealth with noble offspring.
मध्वः सोमस्याश्विना मदाय परत्नो होता विवासते वाम|	aŚvins your ancient priest invites you hither to gladden you with draughts of meath of soma.
बर्हिष्मती रातिर्विश्रिता गीरिषा यातं नासत्योप वाजैः|	our gift is on the grass our song apportioned with food and strength come hither o nāsatyas.
यो वामश्विना मनसो जवीयान रथः सवश्वो विश आजिगाति|	that car of yours swifter than thought o aśvins which drawn by brave steeds cometh to the people.
येन गछथः सुक्र्तो दुरोणं तेन नरा वर्तिरस्मभ्यं यातम|	whereon ye seek the dwelling of the piouscome ye thereon to our abode o heroes.
रषिं नरावंहसः पाञ्चजन्यं रबीसादत्रिं मुञ्चथो गणेन|	ye freed sage atri whom the five tribes honoured from the strait pit ye heroes with his people.
मिनन्ता दस्योरशिवस्य माया अनुपूर्वं वर्षणा चोदयन्ता|	baffling the guiles of the malignant dasyu repelling them ye mighty in succession.
अश्वं न गूळ्हमश्विना दुरेवैर्र्षिं नरा वर्षणा रेभमप्सु|	rebha the sage ye mighty heroes aśvins whom like a horse vile men had sunk in water.
सं तं रिणीथो विप्रुतं दंसोभिर्न वां जूर्यन्ति पूर्व्या कर्तानि|	him wounded with your wondrous power ye rescued your exploits of old time endure for ever.
सुषुप्वांसं न निर्र्तेरुपस्थे सूर्यं न दस्रा तमसि कषियन्तम|	ye brought forth vandana ye wonderworkers for triumph like fair gold that hath been buried.
शुभे रुक्मं न दर्शतं निखातमुदूपथुरश्विना वन्दनाय|	like one who slumbered in destructions bosom or like the sun when dwelling in the darkness.
तद वां नरा शंस्यं पज्रियेण कक्षीवता नासत्या परिज्मन|	kakṣīvān pajras son must laud that exploit of yours nāsatyas heroes ye who wander.
शफादश्वस्य वाजिनो जनाय शतं कुम्भानसिञ्चतं मधूनाम|	when from the hoof of your strong horse ye showered a hundred jars of honey for the people.
युवं नरा सतुवते कर्ष्णियाय विष्णाप्वं ददथुर्विश्वकाय|	to kṛṣṇas son to viśvaka who praised you o heroes ye restored his son viṣṇāpū.
घोषायै चित पित्र्षदे दुरोने पतिं जूर्यन्त्या अश्विनावदत्तम|	to ghoṣā living in her fathers dwelling stricken in years ye gave a husband aśvins.
युवं शयावाय रुशतीमदत्तं महः कषोणस्याश्विना कण्वाय|	ruṣatī of the mighty people aśvins ye gave to Śyāva of the line of kaṇva.
परवाच्यं तद वर्षणा कर्तं वां यन नार्षदायश्रवो अध्यधत्तम|	this deed of yours ye strong ones should be published that ye gave glory to the son of nṛṣad.
पुरू वर्पांस्यश्विना दधाना नि पेदव ऊहथुराशुमश्वम|	o aśvins wearing many forms at pleasure on pedu ye bestowed a fleetfoot courser.
सहस्रसां वाजिनमप्रतीतमहिहनं शरवस्यं तरुत्रम|	strong winner of a thousand spoils resistless the serpent slayer glorious triumphant.
एतानि वां शरवस्या सुदानू बरह्माङगूषं सदनं रोदस्योः|	these glorious things are yours ye bounteous givers prayer praise in both worlds are your habitation.
यद वां पज्रासो अश्विना हवन्ते यातमिषा च विदुषे च वाजम|	o aśvins when the sons of pajra call you send strength with nourishment to him who knoweth.
सूनोर्मानेनाश्विना गर्णाना वाजं विप्राय भुरणा रदन्ता|	hymned with the reverence of a son o aśvins ye swift ones giving booty to the singer.
अगस्त्ये बरह्मणा वाव्र्धाना सं विश्पलां नासत्यारिणीतम|	glorified by agastya with devotion established viśpalā again nāsatyas.
कुह यान्ता सुष्टुतिं काव्यस्य दिवो नपाता वर्षणा शयुत्रा|	ye sons of heaven ye mighty whither went ye sought ye for his fair praise the home of kāvya.
हिरण्यस्येव कलशं निखातमुदूपथुर्दशमे अश्विनाहन|	when like a pitcher full of gold o aśvins on the tenth day ye lifted up the buried.
युवं चयवानमश्विना जरन्तं पुनर्युवानं चक्रथुः शचीभिः|	ye with the aid of your great powers o aśvins restored to youth the ancient man cyavāna.
युवो रथं दुहिता सूर्यस्य सह शरिया नासत्याव्र्णीत|	the daughter of the sun with all her glory o ye nāsatyas chose your car to bear her.
युवं तुग्राय पूर्व्येभिरेवैः पुनर्मन्यावभवतं युवाना|	ye everyouthful ones again remembered tugra according to your ancient manner.
युवं भुज्युमर्णसो निः समुद्राद विभिरूहथुर्र्ज्रेभिरश्वैः|	with horses brown of hue that flew with swift wings ye brought back bhujyu from the sea of billows.
अजोहवीदश्विना तौग्र्यो वां परोळ्हः समुद्रमव्यथिर्जगन्वान|	the son of tugra had invoked you aśvins borne on he went uninjured through the ocean.
निष टमूहथुः सुयुजा रथेन मनोजवसा वर्षणास्वस्ति|	ye with your chariot swift as thought wellharnessed carried him off o mighty ones to safety.
अजोहवीदश्विना वर्तिका वामास्नो यत सीममुञ्चतं वर्कस्य|	the quail had invocated you o aśvins when from the wolfs devouring jaws ye freed her.
वि जयुषा ययथुः सान्वद्रेर्जातं विष्वाचो अहतं विषेण|	with conquering car ye cleft the mountains ridges the offspring of viśvāc ye killed with poison.
शतं मेषान वर्क्ये मामहानं तमः परणीतमशिवेन पित्रा|	he whom for furnishing a hundred wethers to the shewolf his wicked father blinded.
आक्षी रज्राश्वे अश्विनावधत्तं जयोतिरन्धाय चक्रथुर्विचक्षे|	to him Ṛjrāśva gave ye eyes o aśvins light to the blind ye sent for perfect vision.
शुनमन्धाय भरमह्वयत सा वर्कीरश्विना वर्षणा नरेति|	to bring the blind man joy thus cried the shewolf o aśvins o ye mighty ones o heroes.
जारः कनीन इव चक्षदान रज्राश्वः शतमेकंच मेषान|	for me Ṛjrāśva like a youthful lover hath cut piecemeal one and a hundred wethers.
मही वामूतिरश्विना मयोभूरुत सरामं धिष्ण्या संरिणीथः|	great and wealgiving is your aid o aśvins ye objects of all thought made whole the cripple.
अथा युवामिदह्वयत पुरन्धिरागछतं सीं वर्षणाववोभिः|	purandhi also for this cause invoked you and ye o mighty came to her with succours.
अधेनुं दस्रा सतर्यं विषक्टामपिन्वतं शयवे अश्विनागाम|	ye wonderworkers filled with milk for Śayu the milkless cow emaciated barren.
युवं शचीभिर्विमदाय जायां नयूहथुः पुरुमित्रस्य योषाम|	and by your powers the child of purumitra ye brought to vimada to be his consort.
यवं वर्केणाश्विना वपन्तेषं दुहन्ता मनुषाय दस्रा|	ploughing and sowing barley o ye aśvins milking out food for men ye wonderworkers.
अभि दस्युं बकुरेणा धमन्तोरु जयोतिश्चक्रथुरार्याय|	blasting away the dasyu with your trumpet ye gave farspreading light unto the Ārya.
आथर्वणायाश्विना दधीचेअश्व्यं शिरः परत्यैरयतम|	ye brought the horses head aśvins and gave it unto dadhyac the offspring of atharvan.
स वां मधु पर वोचद रतायन तवाष्ट्रं यद दस्रावपिकक्ष्यं वाम|	true he revealed to you o wonderworkers sweet soma tvaṣṭars secret as your girdle.
सदा कवी सुमतिमा चके वां विश्वा धियो अश्विना परावतं मे|	o sages evermore i crave your favour be gracious unto all my prayers o aśvins.
अस्मे रयिं नासत्या बर्हन्तमपत्यसाचं शरुत्यं रराथाम|	grant me nāsatyas riches in abundance wealth famous and accompanied with children.
हिरण्यहस्तमश्विना रराणा पुत्रं नरा वध्रिमत्या अदत्तम|	with liberal bounty to the weaklings consorts ye heroes gave a son hiraṇyahasta.
तरिधा ह शयावमश्विना विकस्तमुज्जीवस ऐरयतंसुदानू|	and Śyāva cut into three several pieces ye brought to life again o bounteous aśvins.
एतानि वामश्विना वीर्याणि पर पूर्व्याण्यायवोअवोचन|	these your heroic exploits o ye aśvins done in the days of old have men related.
बरह्मक्र्ण्वन्तो वर्षणा युवभ्यां सुवीरासो विदथमा वदेम|	may we addressing prayer to you ye mighty speak with brave sons about us to the synod.
तरिश चिन नो अद्या भवतं नवेदसा विभुर वां याम उत रातिर अश्विना|	ye who observe this day be with us even thrice farstretching is you bounty aśvins and your course.
युवोर हि यन्त्रं हिम्येव वाससो ऽभयायंसेन्या भवतम मनीषिभिः|	to you as to a cloak in winter we cleave close you are to be drawn nigh unto us by the wise.
तरयः पवयो मधुवाहने रथे सोमस्य वेनाम अनु विश्व इद विदुः|	three are the fellies in your honeybearing car that travels after somas loved one as all know.
तरय सकम्भास सकभितास आरभे तरिर नक्तं याथस तरिर व अश्विना दिवा|	three are the pillars set upon it for support thrice journey ye by night o aśvins thrice by day.
समाने अहन तरिर अवद्यगोहना तरिर अद्य यज्ञम मधुना मिमिक्षतम|	thrice in the selfsame day ye gods who banish want sprinkle ye thrice today our sacrifice with meath.
तरिर वाजवतीर इषो अश्विना युवं दोषा अस्मभ्यम उषसश च पिन्वतम|	and thrice vouchsafe us store of food with plenteous strength at evening o ye aśvins and at break of day.
तरिर वर्तिर यातं तरिर अनुव्रते जने तरिः सुप्राव्येत्रेधेव शिक्षतम|	thrice come ye to our home thrice to the righteous folk thrice triply aid the man who well deserves your help.
तरिर नान्द्यं वहतम अश्विना युवं तरिः पर्क्षो अस्मे अक्षरेव पिन्वतम|	thrice o ye aśvins bring us what shall make us glad thrice send us store of food as nevermore to fail.
तरिर नो रयिं वहतम अश्विना युवं तरिर देवताता तरिर उतावतं धियः|	thrice o ye aśvins bring to us abundant wealth thrice in the gods assembly thrice assist our thoughts.
तरिः सौभगत्वं तरिर उत शरवांसि नस तरिष्ठं वां सूरे दुहिता रुहद रथम|	thrice grant ye us prosperity thrice grant us fame for the suns daughter hath mounted your threewheeled car.
तरिर नो अश्विना दिव्यानि भेषजा तरिः पार्थिवानि तरिर उ दत्तम अद्भ्यः|	thrice aśvins grant to us the heavenly medicines thrice those of earth and thrice those that the waters hold.
ओमानं शंयोर ममकाय सूनवे तरिधातु शर्म वहतं शुभस पती|	favour and health and strength bestow upon my son triple protection lords of splendour grant to him.
तरिर नो अश्विना यजता दिवेदिवे परि तरिधातु पर्थिवीम अशायतम|	thrice are ye to be worshipped day by day by us thrice o ye aśvins ye travel around the earth.
तिस्रो नासत्या रथ्या परावत आत्मेव वातः सवसराणि गछतम|	carborne from far away o ye nāsatyas come like vital air to bodies come ye to the three.
तरिर अश्विना सिन्धुभिः सप्तमात्र्भिस तरय आहावास तरेधा हविष कर्तम|	thrice o ye aśvins with the seven mother streams three are the jars the triple offering is prepared.
तिस्रः पर्थिवीर उपरि परवा दिवो नाकं रक्षेथे दयुभिर अक्तुभिर हितम|	three are the worlds and moving on above the sky ye guard the firmset vault of heaven through days and nights.
कव तरी चक्रा तरिव्र्तो रथस्य कव तरयो वन्धुरो ये सनीळाः|	where are the three wheels of your triple chariot where are the three seats thereto firmly fastened.
कदा योगो वाजिनो रासभस्य येन यज्ञं नासत्योपयाथः|	when will ye yoke the mighty ass that draws it to bring you to our sacrifice nāsatyas.
आ नासत्या गछतं हूयते हविर मध्वः पिबतम मधुपेभिर आसभिः|	nāsatyas come the sacred gift is offered up drink the sweet juice with lips that know the sweetness well.
युवोर हि पूर्वं सवितोषसो रथम रताय चित्रं घर्तवन्तम इष्यति|	savitar sends before the dawn of day your car fraught with oil variouscoloured to our sacrifice.
आ नासत्या तरिभिर एकादशैर इह देवेभिर यातम मधुपेयम अश्विना|	come o nāsatyas with the thriceeleven gods come o ye aśvins to the drinking of the meath.
परायुस तारिष्टं नी रपांसि मर्क्षतं सेधतं दवेषो भवतं सचाभुवा|	make long our days of life and wipe out all our sins ward off our enemies be with us evermore.
आ नो अश्विना तरिव्र्ता रथेनार्वाञ्चं रयिं वहतं सुवीरम|	borne in your triple car o aśvins bring us present prosperity with noble offspring.
शर्ण्वन्ता वाम अवसे जोहवीमि वर्धे च नो भवतं वाजसातौ|	i cry to you who hear me for protection be ye our helpers where men win the booty.
उषो भद्रेभिरा गहि दिवश्चिद रोचनादधि|	een from above the skys bright realm come uṣas by auspicious ways.
वहन्त्वरुणप्सव उप तवा सोमिनो गर्हम|	let red steeds bear thee to the house of him who pours the soma juice.
सुपेशसं सुखं रथं यमध्यस्था उषस्त्वम|	the chariot which thou mountest fair of shape o uṣas light to move.
तेना सुश्रवसं जनं परावाद्य दुहितर्दिवः|	therewith o daughter of the sky aid men of noble fame today.
वयश्चित ते पतत्रिणो दविपच्चतुष्पदर्जुनि|	bright uṣas when thy times return all quadrupeds and bipeds stir.
उषः परारन्न्र्तून्रनु दिवो अन्तेभ्यस परि|	and round about flock winged birds from all the boundaries of heaven.
वयुछन्ती हि रश्मिभिर्विश्वमाभासि रोचनम|	thou dawning with thy beams of light illumest all the radiant realm.
तां तवामुषर्वसूयवो गीर्भिः कण्वा अहूषत|	thee as thou art the kaṇvas fain for wealth have called with sacred songs.
इन्द्रं मित्रं वरुणमग्निमूतये मारुतं शर्धो अदितिंहवामहे|	call we for aid on indra mitra varuṇa and agni and the marut host and aditi.
रथं न दुर्गाद वसवः सुदानवो विश्वस्मान नोंहसो निष पिपर्तन|	even as a chariot from a difficult ravine bountiful vasus rescue us from all distress.
त आदित्या आ गता सर्वतातये भूत देवा वर्त्रतूर्येषु शम्भुवः|	come ye Ādityas for our full prosperity in conquests of the foe ye gods bring joy to us.
रथं|	even as a chariot from a difficult ravine bountiful vasus rescue us from all distress.
अवन्तु नः पितरः सुप्रवाचना उत देवी देवपुत्रे रताव्र्धा|	may the most glorious fathers aid us and the two goddesses mothers of the gods who strengthen law.
रथं|	even as a chariot from a difficult ravine bountiful vasus rescue us from all distress.
नराशंसं वाजिनं वाजयन्निह कषयद्वीरं पूषणं सुम्नैरीमहे|	to mighty narāśaṁsa strengthening his might to pūṣan ruler over men we pray with hymns.
रथं|	even as a chariot from a difficult ravine bountiful vasus rescue us from all distress.
बर्हस्पते सदमिन नः सुगं कर्धि शं योर्यत ते मनुर्हितं तदीमहे|	bṛhaspati make us evermore an easy path we crave what boon thou hast for men in rest and stir.
रथं|	like as a chariot from a difficult ravine bountiful vasus rescue us from all distress.
इन्द्रं कुत्सो वर्त्रहणं शचीपतिं काटे निबाळ्ह रषिरह्वदूतये|	sunk in the pit the Ṛṣi kutsa called to aid indra the vṛtraslayer lord of power and might.
रथं|	even as a chariot from a difficult ravine bountiful vasus rescue us from all distress.
देवैर्नो देव्यदितिर्नि पातु देवस्त्राता तरायतामप्रयुछन|	may aditi the goddess guard us with the gods may the protecting god keep us with ceaseless care.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
कया शुभा सवयसः सनीळाः समान्या मरुतः सं मिमिक्षुः|	with what bright beauty are the maruts jointly invested peers in age who dwell together.
कया मती कुत एतास एतेअर्चन्ति शुष्मं वर्षणो वसूया|	from what place have they come with what intention sing they their strength through love of wealth these heroes.
कस्य बरह्माणि जुजुषुर्युवानः को अध्वरे मरुत आ ववर्त|	whose prayers have they the youthful ones accepted who to his sacrifice hath turned the maruts.
शयेनानिव धरजतो अन्तरिक्षे केन महा मनसा रीरमाम|	we will delay them on their journey sweepingwith what high spiritthrough the air like eagles.
कुतस्त्वमिन्द्र माहिनः सन्नेको यासि सत्पते किं त इत्था|	whence comest thou alone thou who art mighty indra lord of the brave what is thy purpose.
सं पर्छसे समराणः शुभानैर्वोचेस्तन नो हरिवो यत्ते अस्मे|	thou greetest us when meeting us the bright ones lord of bay steeds say what thou hast against us.
बरह्माणि मे मतयः शं सुतासः शुष्म इयर्ति परभ्र्तो मे अद्रिः|	mine are devotions hymns sweet are libations strength stirs and hurled forth is my bolt of thunder.
आ शासते परति हर्यन्त्युक्थेमा हरी वहतस्ता नो अछ|	they call for me their lauds are longing for me these my bay steeds bear me to these oblations.
अतो वयमन्तमेभिर्युजानाः सवक्षत्रेभिस्तन्वः शुम्भमानाः|	therefore together with our strong companions having adorned our bodies now we harness.
महोभिरेतानुप युज्महे नविन्द्र सवधामनु हि नो बभूथ|	our spotted deer with might for thou o indra hast learnt and understood our godlike nature.
कव सया वो मरुतः सवधासीद यन मामेकं समधत्ताहिहत्ये|	where was that nature then of yours o maruts that ye charged me alone to slay the dragon.
अहं हयूग्रस्तविषस्तुविष्मान विश्वस्य शत्रोरनमं वधस्नैः|	for i in truth am fierce and strong and mighty i bent away from every foemans weapons.
भूरि चकर्थ युज्येभिरस्मे समानेभिर्व्र्षभ पौंस्येभिः|	yea much hast thou achieved with us for comrades with manly valour like thine own thou hero.
भूरीणि हि कर्णवामा शविष्ठेन्द्र करत्वा मरुतो यद्वशाम|	much may we too achieve o mightiest indra with our great power we maruts when we will it.
वधीं वर्त्रं मरुत इन्द्रियेण सवेन भामेन तविषो बभूवान|	vṛtra i slew by mine own strength o maruts having waxed mighty in mine indignation.
अहमेता मनवे विश्वश्चन्द्राः सुगा अपश्चकर वज्रबाहुः|	i with the thunder in my hand created for man these lucid softly flowing waters.
अनुत्तमा ते मघवन नकिर्नु न तवावानस्ति देवता विदानः|	nothing o maghavan stands firm before thee among the gods not one is found thine equal.
न जायमानो नशते न जातो यानि करिष्या कर्णुहिप्रव्र्द्ध|	none born or springing into life comes nigh thee do what thou hast to do exceeding mighty.
एकस्य चिन मे विभ्वस्त्वोजो या नु दध्र्ष्वान कर्णवै मनीषा|	mine only be transcendent power whatever i daring in my spirit may accomplish.
अहं हयूग्रो मरुतो विदानो यानि चयवमिन्द्र इदीश एषाम|	for i am known as terrible o maruts i indra am the lord of what i ruined.
अमन्दन मा मरुत सतोमो अत्र यन मे नरः शरुत्यं बरह्म चक्र|	now o ye maruts hath your praise rejoiced me the glorious hymn which ye have made me heroes.
इन्द्राय वर्ष्णे सुमखाय मह्यं सख्ये सखायस्तन्वेतनूभिः|	for me for indra champion strong in battle for me yourselves as lovers for a lover.
एवेदेते परति मा रोचमाना अनेद्यः शरव एषो दधानाः|	here truly they send forth their sheen to meet me wearing their blameless glory and their vigour.
संचक्ष्या मरुतश्चन्द्रवर्णा अछान्त मे छदयाथा चनूनम|	when i have seen you maruts in gay splendour ye have delighted me so now delight me.
को नवत्र मरुतो मामहे वः पर यातन सखीन्रछा सखायः|	who here hath magnified you o ye maruts speed forward o ye lovers to your lovers.
मन्मानि चित्रा अपिवातयन्त एषां भूत नवेदा म रतानाम|	ye radiant ones assisting their devotions of these my holy rites he ye regardful.
आ यद दुवस्याद दुवसे न कारुरस्माञ्चक्रे मान्यस्य मेधा|	to this hath mānyas wisdom brought us so as to aid as aids the poet him who worships.
ओ षु वर्त्त मरुतो विप्रमछेमा बरह्माणि जरिता वोर्चत|	bring hither quick on to the sage ye maruts these prayers for you the singer hath recited.
एष व सतोमो मरुत इयं गीर्मान्दार्यस्य मान्यस्य करोः|	may this your praise may this your song o maruts sung by the poet mānas son māndārya.
एषा यासीष्ट तन्वे वयां विद्यामेषं वर्जनं जीरदानुम|	bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
इन्द्राय हि दयौरसुरो अनम्नतेन्द्राय मही पर्थिवी वरीमभिर्द्युम्नसाता वरीमभिः|	to indra dyaus the asura hath bowed him down to indra mighty earth with wideextending tracts to win the light with widespread tracts.
इन्द्रं विश्वे सजोषसो देवासो दधिरे पुरः|	all gods of one accord have set indra in front preeminent.
इन्द्राय विश्वा सवनानि मानुषा रातानि सन्तु मानुषा|	for indra all libations must be set apart all mans libations set apart.
विश्वेषु हि तवा सवनेषु तुञ्जते समानमेकं वर्षमण्यवः पर्थक सवः सनिष्यवः पर्थक|	in all libations men with hero spirit urge the universal one each seeking several light each fain to win the light apart.
तं तवा नावं न पर्षणिं शूषस्य धुरि धीमहि|	thee furthering like a ship will we set to the chariotpole of strength.
इन्द्रं न यज्ञैश्चितयन्त आयव सतोमेभिरिन्द्रमायवः|	as men who win with sacrifices indras thought men who win indra with their lauds.
वि तवा ततस्रे मिथुना अवस्यवो वरजस्य साता गव्यस्य निःस्र्जः सक्षन्त इन्द्र निःस्र्जः|	couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee pouring their presents forth to win a stall of kine pouring gifts indra seeking thee.
यद गव्यन्ता दवा जना सवर्यन्ता समूहसि|	when two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bringest face to face in war.
आविष करिक्रद वर्षणं सचाभुवं वज्रमिन्द्र सचाभुवम|	thou showest indra then the bolt thy constant friend the bull that ever waits on thee.
विदुष टे अस्य वीर्यस्य पूरवः पुरो यदिन्द्र शारदीरवातिरः सासहानो अवातिरः|	this thine heroic power men of old time have known wherewith thou breakest down indra autumnal forts breakest them down with conquering might.
शासस्तमिन्द्र मर्त्यमयज्युं शवसस पते|	thou hast chastised o indra lord of strength the man who worships not.
महीममुष्णाः पर्थिवीमिमा अपो मन्दसान इमा अपः|	and made thine own this great earth and these waterfloods with joyous heart these waterfloods.
आदित ते अस्य वीर्यस्य चर्किरन मदेषु वर्षन्नुशिजो यदाविथ सखीयतो यदाविथ|	and they have bruited far this heromight when thou o strong one in thy joy helpest thy suppliants who sought to win thee for their friend.
चकर्थ कारमेभ्यः पर्तनासु परवन्तव|	their battlecry thou madest sound victorious in the shocks of war.
ते अन्यामअन्यां नद्यं सनिष्णत शरवस्यन्तः सनिष्णत|	one stream after another have they gained from thee eager for glory have they gained.
उतो नो अस्या उषसो जुषेत हयर्कस्य बोधि हविषो हवीमभिः सवर्षाता हवीमभिः|	also this morn may he be well inclined to us mark at our call our offerings and our song of praise our call that we may win the light.
यदिन्द्र हन्तवे मर्धो वर्षा वज्रिञ्चिकेतसि|	as thou o indra thunderarmed wilt as the strong one slay the foe.
आ मे अस्य वेधसो नवीयसो मन्म शरुधि नवीयसः|	listen thou to the prayer of me a later sage hear thou a later sages prayer.
तवं तमिन्द्र वाव्र्धानो अस्मयुरमित्रयन्तं तुविजात मर्त्यं वज्रेण शूर मर्त्यम|	o indra waxen strong and wellinclined to us thou very mighty slay the man that is our foe slay the man hero with thy bolt.
जहि यो नो अघायति शर्णुष्व सुश्रवस्तमः|	slay thou the man who injures us hear thou as readiest to hear.
रिष्टं न यामन्नप भूतु दुर्मतिर्विश्वाप भूतु दुर्मतिः|	far be malignity like mischief on the march afar be all malignity.
पर दयावा यज्ञैः पर्थिवी रताव्र्धा मही सतुषे विदथेषु परचेतसा|	i praise with sacrifices mighty heaven and earth at festivals the wise the strengtheners of law.
देवेभिर्ये देवपुत्रे सुदंससेत्था धिया वार्याणि परभूषतः|	who having gods for progeny conjoined with gods through wonderworking wisdom bring forth choicest boons.
उत मन्ये पितुरद्रुहो मनो मातुर्महि सवतवस्तद धवीमभिः|	with invocations on the gracious fathers mind and on the mothers great inherent power i muse.
सुरेतसा पितरा भूम चक्रतुरुरु परजाया अम्र्तंवरीमभिः|	prolific parents they have made the world of life and for their brood all round wide immortality.
ते सूनवः सवपसः सुदंससो मही जज्ञुर्मातरा पूर्वचित्तये|	these sons of yours well skilled in work of wondrous power brought forth to life the two great mothers first of all.
सथातुश्च सत्यं जगतश्च धर्मणि पुत्रस्य पाथः पदमद्वयाविनः|	to keep the truth of all that stands and all that moves ye guard the station of your son who knows no guile.
ते मायिनो ममिरे सुप्रचेतसो जामी सयोनी मिथुना समोकसा|	they with surpassing skill most wise have measured out the twins united in their birth and in their home.
नव्यंनव्यं तन्तुमा तन्वते दिवि समुद्रे अन्तः कवयः सुदीतयः|	they the refulgent sages weave within the sky yea in the depths of sea a web for ever new.
तद राधो अद्य सवितुर्वरेण्यं वयं देवस्य परसवे मनामहे|	this is today the goodliest gift of savitar this thought we have when now the god is furthering us.
अस्मभ्यं दयावाप्र्थिवी सुचेतुना रयिं धत्तं वसुमन्तं शतग्विनम|	on us with lovingkindness heaven and earth bestow riches and various wealth and treasure hundredfold.
अस्तु शरौषट पुरो अग्नीं धिया दध आ नु तच छर्धो दिव्यं वर्णीमह इन्द्रवायू वर्णीमहे|	heard be our prayer in thought i honour agni first now straightway we elect this heavenly company indra and vāyu we elect.
यद ध कराणा विवस्वति नाभा संदायि नव्यसी|	for when our latest thought is raised and on vivasvān centred well.
अध पर सू न उप यन्तु धीतयो देवां अछा न धीतयः|	then may our holy songs go forward on their way our songs as twere unto the gods.
यद ध तयन मित्रावरुणाव रताद अध्य आददाथे अन्र्तं सवेन मन्युना दक्षस्य सवेन मन्युना|	as there ye mitra varuṇa above the true have taken to yourselves the untrue with your mind with wisdoms mental energy.
युवोर इत्थाधि सद्मस्व अपश्याम हिरण्ययम|	so in the seats wherein ye dwell have we beheld the golden one.
धीभिश चन मनसा सवेभिर अक्षभिः सोमस्य सवेभिर अक्षभिः|	not with our thoughts or spirit but with these our eyes yea with the eyes that soma gives.
युवां सतोमेभिर देवयन्तो अश्विनाश्रावयन्त इव शलोकम आयवो युवां हव्याभ्य आयवः|	aśvins the pious call you with their hymns of praise sounding their loud song forth to you these living men to their oblations living men.
युवोर विश्वा अधि शरियः पर्क्षश च विश्ववेदसा|	all glories and all nourishment lords of all wealth depend on you.
परुषायन्ते वाम पवयो हिरण्यये रथे दस्रा हिरण्यये|	the fellies of your golden chariot scatter drops mighty ones of your golden car.
अचेति दस्रा वय  नाकम रण्वथो युञ्जते वां रथयुजो दिविष्टिष्व अध्वस्मानो दिविष्टिषु|	well is it known o mighty ones ye open heaven for you the chariotsteeds are yoked for morning rites unswerving steeds for morning rites.
अधि वां सथाम वन्धुरे रथे दस्रा हिरण्यये|	we set you on the chariotseat ye mighty on the golden car.
पथेव यन्ताव अनुशासता रजो ऽञजसा शासता रजः|	ye seek midair as by a path that leads aright as by a path that leads direct.
शचीभिर नः शचीवसू दिवा नक्तं दशस्यतम|	o rich in strength through your great power vouchsafe us blessings day and night.
मा वां रातिर उप दसत कदा चनास्मद रातिः कदा चन|	the offerings which we bring to you shall never fail gifts brought by us shall never fail.
वर्षन्न इन्द्र वर्षपाणास इन्दव इमे सुता अद्रिषुतास उद्भिदस तुभ्यं सुतास उद्भिदः|	these somadrops strong indra drink for heroes poured pressed out by pressingstones are welling forth for thee for thee the drops are welling forth.
ते तवा मन्दन्तु दावने महे चित्राय राधसे|	they shall make glad thy heart to give to give wealth great and wonderful.
गीर्भिर गिर्वाह सतवमान आ गहि सुम्र्ळीको न आ गहि|	thou who acceptest praise come glorified by hymns come thou to us benevolent.
ओ षू णो अग्ने शर्णुहि तवम ईळितो देवेभ्यो बरवसि यज्ञियेभ्यो राजभ्यो यज्ञियेभ्यः|	quickly o agni hear us magnified by us thou shalt speck for us to the gods adorable yea to the kings adorable.
यद ध तयाम अङगिरोभ्यो धेनुं देवा अदत्तन|	when o ye deities ye gave that milchcow to the aṅgirases.
वि तां दुह्रे अर्यमा कर्तरी सचां एष तां वेद मे सचा|	they milked her aryaman joined with them did the work he knoweth her as well as i.
मो षु वो अस्मद अभि तानि पौंस्या सना भूवन दयुम्नानि मोत जारिषुर अस्मत पुरोत जारिषुः|	neer may these manly deeds of yours for us grow old never may your bright glories fall into decay never before our time decay.
यद वश चित्रं युगेयुगे नव्यं घोषाद अमर्त्यम|	what deed of yours new every age wondrous surpassing man rings forth.
अस्मासु तन मरुतो यच च दुष्टरं दिध्र्ता यच च दुष्टरम|	whatever maruts may be difficult to gain grant us whateer is hard to gain.
दध्यङ ह मे जनुषम पूर्वो अङगिराः परियमेधः कण्वो अत्रिर मनुर विदुस ते मे पूर्वे मनुर विदुः|	dadhyac of old aṅgiras priyamedha these and kaṇva atri manu knew my birth yea those of ancient days and manu knew.
तेषां देवेष्व आयतिर अस्माकं तेषु नाभयः|	their long line stretcheth to the gods our birthconnexions are with them.
तेषाम पदेन मह्य आ नमे गिरेन्द्राग्नी आ नमे गिरा|	to these for their high station i bow down with song to indra agni bow with song.
होता यक्षद वनिनो वन्त वार्यम बर्हस्पतिर यजति वेन उक्षभिः पुरुवारेभिर उक्षभिः|	let the invoker bless let offerers bring choice gifts bṛhaspati the friend doth sacrifice with steers steers that have many an excellence.
जग्र्भ्मा दूरादिशं शलोकम अद्रेर अध तमना|	now with our ears we catch the sound of the pressstone that rings afar.
अधारयद अररिन्दानि सुक्रतुः पुरू सद्मानि सुक्रतुः|	the very strong hath gained the waters by himself the strong gained many a restingplace.
ये देवासो दिव्य एकादश सथ पर्थिव्याम अध्य एकादश सथ|	o ye eleven gods whose home is heaven o ye eleven who make earth your dwelling.
अप्सुक्षितो महिनैकादश सथ ते देवासो यज्ञम इमं जुषध्वम|	ye who with might eleven live in waters accept this sacrifice o gods with pleasure.
अश्वावति परथमो गोषु गछति सुप्रावीरिन्द्र मर्त्यस्तवोतिभिः|	indra the mortal man well guarded by thine aid goes foremost in the wealth of horses and of kine.
तमित पर्णक्षि वसुना भवीयसा सिन्धुमापो यथाभितो विचेतसः|	with amplest wealth thou fillest him as round about the waters clearly seen afar fill sindhu full.
आपो न देवीरुप यन्ति होत्रियमवः पश्यन्ति विततं यथा रजः|	the heavenly waters come not nigh the priestly bowl they but look down and see how far midair is spread.
पराचैर्देवासः पर णयन्ति देवयुं बरह्मप्रियं जोषयन्ते वरा इव|	the deities conduct the pious man to them like suitors they delight in him who loveth prayer.
अधि दवयोरदधा उक्थ्यं वचो यतस्रुचा मिथुना या सपर्यतः|	praiseworthy blessing hast thou laid upon the pair who with uplifted ladle serve thee man and wife.
असंयत्तो वरते ते कषेति पुष्यति भद्रा शक्तिर्यजमानाय सुन्वते|	unchecked he dwells and prospers in thy law thy power brings blessing to the sacrificer pouring gifts.
आदङगिराः परथमं दधिरे वय इद्धाग्नयः शम्या येसुक्र्त्यया|	first the aṅgirases won themselves vital power whose fires were kindled through good deeds and sacrifice.
सर्वं पणेः समविन्दन्त भोजनमश्वावन्तं गोमन्तमा पशुं नरः|	the men together found the paṇis hoarded wealth the cattle and the wealth in horses and in kine.
यज्ञैरथर्वा परथमः पथस्तते ततः सूर्यो वरतपावेन आजनि|	atharvan first by sacrifices laid the paths then guardian of the law sprang up the loving sun.
आ गा आजदुशना काव्यः सचा यमस्य जातमम्र्तं यजामहे|	uśanā kāvya straightway hither drove the kine let us with offerings honour yamas deathless birth.
बर्हिर्वा यत सवपत्याय वर्ज्यतेअर्को वा शलोकमाघोषतेदिवि|	when sacred grass is trimmed to aid the auspicious work or the hymn makes its voice of praise sound to the sky.
गरावा यत्र वदति कारुरुक्थ्यस्तस्येदिन्द्रो अभिपित्वेषु रण्यति|	where the stone rings as twere a singer skilled in laudindra in truth delights when these come near to him.
अभि तयं मेषं पुरुहूतं रग्मियमिन्द्रं गीर्भिर्मदता वस्वो अर्णवम|	make glad with songs that ram whom many men invoke worthy of songs of praise indra the sea of wealth.
यस्य दयावो न विचरन्ति मानुषा भुजे मंहिष्ठमभि विप्रमर्चत|	whose gracious deeds for men spread like the heavens abroad sing praise to him the sage most liberal for our good.
अभीमवन्वन सवभिष्टिमूतयोअन्तरिक्षप्रां तविषीभिराव्र्तम|	as aids the skilful Ṛbhus yearned to indra strong to save who fills midair encompassed round with might.
इन्द्रं दक्षास रभवो मदच्युतं शतक्रतुं जवनी सून्र्तारुहत|	rushing in rapture and oer Śatakratu came the gladdening shout that urged him on to victory.
तवं गोत्रमङगिरोभ्योअव्र्णोरपोतात्रये शतदुरेषु गातुवित|	thou hast disclosed the kines stall for the aṅgirases and made a way for atri by a hundred doors.
ससेन चिद विमदायावहो वस्वाजावद्रिं वावसानस्यनर्तयन|	on vimada thou hast bestowed both food and wealth making thy bolt dance in the sacrificers fight.
तवमपामपिधानाव्र्णोर अपाधारयः पर्वते दानुमद वसु|	thou hast unclosed the prisons of the waters thou hast in the mountain seized the treasure rich in gifts.
वर्त्रं यदिन्द्र शवसावधीरहिमादित सूर्यं दिव्यारोहयो दर्शे|	when thou hadst slain with might the dragon vṛtra thou indra didst raise the sun in heaven for all to see.
तवं मायाभिरप मायिनोअधमः सवधाभिर्ये अधि शुप्तावजुह्वत|	with wondrous might thou blewest enchanter fiends away with powers celestial those who called on thee in jest.
तवं पिप्रोर्न्र्मणः परारुजः पुरः पर रजिश्वानं दस्युहत्येष्वाविथ|	thou herohearted hast broken down piprus forts and helped Ṛjiśvan when the dasyus were struck dead.
तवं कुत्सं शुष्णहत्येष्वाविथारन्धयोअतिथिग्वाय शम्बरम|	thou savedst kutsa when Śuṣṇa was smitten down to atithigva gavest Śambara for a prey.
महान्तं चिदर्बुदं नि करमीः पदा सनादेव दस्युहत्याय जज्ञिषे|	een mighty arbuda thou troddest under foot thou from of old wast born to strike the dasyus dead.
तवे विश्वा तविषी सध्र्यग घिता तव राधः सोमपीथाय हर्षते|	all power and might is closely gathered up in thee thy bounteous spirit joys in drinking soma juice.
तव वज्रश्चिकिते बाह्वोर्हितो वर्श्चा शत्रोरव विश्वानि वर्ष्ण्या|	known is the thunderbolt that lies within thine arms rend off therewith all manly prowess of our foe.
वि जानीह्यार्यान ये च दस्यवो बर्हिष्मते रन्धया शासदव्रतान|	discern thou well Āryas and dasyus punishing the lawless give them up to him whose grass is strewn.
शाकी भव यजमानस्य चोदिता विश्वेत ता ते सधमादेषु चाकन|	be thou the sacrificers strong encourager all these thy deeds are my delight at festivals.
अनुव्रताय रन्धयन्नपव्रतानाभूभिरिन्द्रः शनथयन्ननाभुवः|	indra gives up the lawless to the pious man destroying by the strong ones those who have no strength.
वर्द्धस्य चिद वर्धतो दयामिनक्षत सतवानो वम्रो वि जघान सन्दिहः|	vamra when glorified destroyed the gathered piles of the still waxing great one who would reach the heaven.
तक्षद यत त उशना सहसा सहो वि रोदसी मज्मना बाधते शवः|	the might which uśanā hath formed for thee with might rends in its greatness and with strength both worlds apart.
आ तवा वातस्य नर्मणो मनोयुज आ पूर्यमाणमवहन्नभि शरवः|	o herosouled the steeds of vāta yoked by thought have carried thee to fame while thou art filled with power.
मन्दिष्ट यदुशने काव्ये सचानिन्द्रो वङकू वङकुतराधि तिष्ठति|	when indra hath rejoiced with kāvya uśanā he mounts his steeds who swerve wider and wider yet.
उग्रो ययिं निरपः सरोतसास्र्जद वि शुष्णस्य दरंहिता ऐरयत पुरः|	the strong hath loosed his bolt with the swift rush of rain and he hath rent in pieces Śuṣṇas firmbuilt forts.
आ समा रथं वर्षपाणेषु तिष्ठसि शार्यातस्य परभ्र्तायेषु मन्दसे|	thou mountest on thy car amid strong soma draughts Śāryāta brought thee those in which thou hast delight.
इन्द्र यथा सुतसोमेषु चाकनोअनर्वाणंश्लोकमा रोहसे दिवि|	indra when thou art pleased with men whose soma flows thou risest to unchallenged glory in the sky.
अददा अर्भां महते वचस्यवे कक्षीवते वर्चयामिन्द्र सुन्वते|	to old kakṣīvān somapresser skilled in song o indra thou didst give the youthful vṛcayā.
मेनाभवो वर्षणश्वस्य सुक्रतो विश्वेत ता ते सवनेषु परवाच्या|	thou very wise wast menā vrsanśvas child those deeds of thine must all be told at soma feasts.
इन्द्रो अश्रायि सुध्यो निरेके पज्रेषु सतोमो दुर्यो न यूपः|	the good mans refuge in his need is indra firm as a doorpost praised among the pajras.
अश्वयुर्गव्यू रथयुर्वसूयुरिन्द्र इद रायः कषयति परयन्ता|	indra alone is lord of wealth the giver lover of riches chariots kine and horses.
इदं नमो वर्षभाय सवराजे सत्यशुष्माय तवसेअवाचि|	to him the mighty one the selfresplendent verily strong and great this praise is uttered.
अस्मिन्निन्द्र वर्जने सर्ववीराः समत सूरिभिस्तव शर्मन सयाम|	may we and all the heroes with the princes be in this fray o indra in thy keeping.
सहस्रं त इन्द्रोतयो नः सहस्रमिषो हरिवो गूर्ततमाः|	a thousand are thy helps for us o indra a thousand lord of bays thy choice refreshments.
सहस्रं रायो मादयध्यै सहस्रिण उप नो यन्तु वाजाः|	wealth of a thousand sorts hast thou to cheer us may precious goods come nigh to us in thousands.
आ नोअवोभिर्मरुतो यान्त्वछा जयेष्ठेभिर्वा बर्हद्दिवैःसुमायाः|	may the most sapient maruts with protection with best boons brought from lofty heaven approach us.
अध यदेषां नियुतः परमाः समुद्रस्य चिद्धनयन्त पारे|	now when their team of the most noble horses speeds even on the seas extremest limit.
मिम्यक्ष येषु सुधिता घर्ताची हिरण्यनिर्णिगुपरा न रष्टिः|	close to them clings one moving in seclusion like a mans wife like a spear carried rearward.
गुहा चरन्ती मनुषो न योषा सभावती विदथ्येव सं वाक|	well grasped bright decked with gold there is vāk also like to a courtly eloquent dame among them.
परा शुभ्रा अयासो यव्या साधारण्येव मरुतो मिमिक्षुः|	far off the brilliant neverweary maruts cling to the young maid as a joint possession.
न रोदसी अप नुदन्त घोरा जुषन्त वर्धं सख्याय देवाः|	the fierce gods drave not rodasī before them but wished for her to grow their friend and fellow.
जोषद यदीमसुर्या सचध्यै विषितस्तुका रोदसी नर्मणाः|	when chose immortal rodasī to followshe with loose tresses and heroic spirit.
आ सूर्येव विधतो रथं गात तवेषप्रतीका नभसो नेत्या|	she climbed her servants chariot she like sūrya with cloudlike motion and refulgent aspect.
आस्थापयन्त युवतिं युवानः शुभे निमिष्लां विदथेषुपज्राम|	upon their car the young men set the maiden wedded to glory mighty in assemblies.
अर्को यद वो मरुतो हविष्मान गायद गाथं सुतसोमो दुवस्यन|	when your song maruts rose and with oblation the somapourer sang his hymn in worship.
परतं विवक्मि वक्म्यो य एषां मरुतां महिमा सत्यो अस्ति|	i will declare the greatness of these maruts their real greatness worthy to be lauded.
सचा यदीं वर्षमणा अहंयु सथिरा चिज्जनीर्वहते सुभागाः|	how with them she though firm strongminded haughty travels to women happy in their fortune.
पान्ति मित्रावरुणाववद्याच्चयत ईमर्यमो अप्रशस्तान|	mitra and varuṇa they guard from censure aryaman too discovers worthless sinners firm things are overthrown that neer were shaken he prospers maruts who gives choice oblations.
उत चयवन्ते अच्युता धरुवाणि वाव्र्ध ईं मरुतो दातिवारः|	none of us maruts near or at a distance hath ever reached the limit of your vigour.
नही नु वो मरुतो अन्त्यस्मे आरात्ताच्चिच्छवसो अन्तमापुः|	they in courageous might still waxing boldly have compassed round their foemen like an ocean.
ते धर्ष्णुना शवसा शूशुवांसोअर्णो न दवेषो धर्षता परि षठुः|	may we this day be dearest friends of indra and let us call on him in fight tomorrow.
वयमद्येन्द्रस्य परेष्ठा वयं शवो वोचेमहि समर्ये|	so were we erst new might attend us daily so be with us Ṛbhukṣan of the heroes.
वयं पुरा महि च नो अनु दयून तन न रभुक्षा नरामनु षयात|	may this your laud may this your song o maruts sung by the poet mānas son māndārya.
एष व सतोमो|	bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
सुरूपक्र्त्नुमूतये सुदुघामिव गोदुहे|	as a good cow to him who milks we call the doer of fair deeds.
जुहूमसि दयविदयवि|	to our assistance day by day.
उप नः सवना गहि सोमस्य सोमपाः पिब|	come thou to our libations drink of soma somadrinker thou.
गोदा इद रेवतोमदः|	the rich ones rapture giveth kine.
अथा ते अन्तमानां विद्याम सुमतीनाम|	so may we be acquainted with thine innermost benevolence.
मा नो अति खय आगहि|	neglect us not come hitherward.
परेहि विग्रमस्त्र्तमिन्द्रं पर्छा विपश्चितम|	go to the wise unconquered one ask thou of indra skilled in song.
यस्ते सखिभ्य आ वरम|	him who is better than thy friends.
उत बरुवन्तु नो निदो निरन्यतश्चिदारत|	whether the men who mock us say depart unto another place.
दधाना इन्द्र इद दुवः|	ye who serve indra and none else.
उत नः सुभगानरिर्वोचेयुर्दस्म कर्ष्टयः|	or whether god of wondrous deeds all our true people call us blest.
सयामेदिन्द्रस्य शर्मणि|	still may we dwell in indras care.
एमाशुमाशवे भर यज्ञश्रियं नर्मादनम|	unto the swift one bring the swift mancheering grace of sacrifice.
पतयन मन्दयत्सखम|	that to the friend gives wings and joy.
अस्य पीत्वा शतक्रतो घनो वर्त्राणामभवः|	thou Śatakratu drankest this and wast the vṛtras slayer thou.
परावो वाजेषु वाजिनम|	helpest the warrior in the fray.
तं तवा वाजेषु वाजिनं वाजयामः शतक्रतो|	we strengthen Śatakratu thee yea thee the powerful in fight.
धनानामिन्द्र सातये|	that indra we may win us wealth.
यो रायोअवनिर्महान सुपारः सुन्वतः सखा|	to him the mighty stream of wealth prompt friend of him who pours the juice.
तस्मा इन्द्राय गायत|	yea to this indra sing your song.
नि काव्या वेधसः शश्वतस कर्हस्ते दधानो नर्या पुरूणि|	though holding many gifts for men he humbleth the higher powers of each wise ordainer.
अग्निर्भुवद रयिपती रयीणां सत्रा चक्राणो अम्र्तानि विश्वा|	agni is now the treasurelord of treasures for ever granting all immortal bounties.
अस्मे वत्सं परि षन्तं न विन्दन्निछन्तो विश्वे अम्र्ता अमूराः|	the gods infallible all searching found not him the dear babe who still is round about us.
शरमयुवः पदव्यो धियन्धास्तस्थुः पदे परमेचार्वग्नेः|	worn weary following his track devoted they reached the lovely highest home of agni.
तिस्रो यदग्ने शरदस्त्वामिच्छुचिं घर्तेन शुचयः सपर्यान|	because with holy oil the pure ones agni served thee the very pure three autumn seasons.
नामानि चिद दधिरे यज्ञियान्यसूदयन्त तन्वः सुजाताः|	therefore they won them holy names for worship and nobly born they dignified their bodies.
आ रोदसी बर्हती वेविदानाः पर रुद्रिया जभ्रिरे यज्ञियासः|	making them known to spacious earth and heaven the holy ones revealed the powers of rudra.
विदन मर्तो नेमधिता चिकित्वानग्निं पदे परमे तस्थिवांसम|	the mortal band discerning in the distance found agni standing in the loftiest station.
संजानाना उप सीदन्नभिज्ञु पत्नीवन्तो नमस्यं नमस्यन|	nigh they approached oneminded with their spouses kneeling to him adorable paid worship.
रिरिक्वांसस्तन्वः कर्ण्वत सवाः सखा सख्युर्निमिषिरक्षमाणाः|	friend finding in his own friends eye protection they made their own the bodies which they chastened.
तरिः सप्त यद गुह्यानि तवे इत पदाविदन निहिता यज्ञियासः|	soon as the holy beings had discovered the thriceseven mystic things contained within thee.
तेभी रक्षन्ते अम्र्तं सजोषाः पशूञ्च सथातॄञ्चरथं च पाहि|	with these oneminded they preserve the amṛta guard thou the life of all their plants and cattle.
विद्वानग्ने वयुनानि कषितीनां वयानुषक छुरुधो जीवसेधाः|	thou agni knower of mens works hast sent us good food in constant course for our subsistence.
अन्तर्विद्वानध्वनो देवयानानतन्द्रो दूतो अभवो हविर्वाट|	thou deeply skilled in paths of gods becamest an envoy never wearied offeringbearer.
सवाध्यो दिव आ सप्त यह्वी रायो दुरो वय रतज्ञा अजानन|	knowing the law the seven strong floods from heaven full of good thought discerned the doors of riches.
विदद गव्यं सरमा दर्ळ्हमूर्वं येना नु कं मानुषीभोजते विट|	saramā found the cattles firmbuilt prison whereby the race of man is still supported.
आ ये विश्वा सवपत्यानि तस्थुः कर्ण्वानासो अम्र्तत्वाय गातुम|	they who approached all noble operations making a path that leads to life immortal.
मह्ना महद्भिः पर्थिवी वि तस्थे माता पुत्रैरदितिर्धायसे वेः|	to be the birds support the spacious mother aditi and her great sons stood in power.
अधि सरियं नि दधुश्चारुमस्मिन दिवो यदक्षी अम्र्ता अक्र्ण्वन|	when gods immortal made both eyes of heaven they gave to him the gift of beauteous glory.
अध कषरन्ति सिन्धवो न सर्ष्टाः पर नी चीरग्नेरुषीरजानन|	now they flow forth like rivers set in motion they knew the red steeds coming down o agni.
पर सु जयेष्ठं निचिराभ्यां बर्हन नमो हव्यं मतिं भरता मर्ळयद्भ्यां सवादिष्ठं मर्ळयद्भ्याम|	bring adoration ample and most excellent hymn offerings to the watchful twain the bountiful your sweetest to the bounteous ones.
ता सम्राजाघ्र्तासुती यज्ञेयज्ञ उपस्तुता|	sovrans adored with streams of oil and praised at every sacrifice.
अथैनोः कषत्रं न कुतश्चनाध्र्षे देवत्वं नू चिदाध्र्षे|	their high imperial might may nowhere be assailed neer may their godhead be assailed.
अद्रशि गातुरुरवे वरीयसी पन्था रतस्य समयंस्त रश्मिभिश्चक्षुर्भगस्य रश्मिभिः|	for the broad sun was seen a path more widely laid the path of holy law hath been maintained with rays the eye with bhagas rays of light.
दयुक्षं मित्रस्य सादनमर्यम्णो वरुणस्य च|	firmset in heaven is mitras home and aryamans and varuṇas.
अथा दधाते बर्हदुक्त्य्हं वयौपस्तुत्यं बर्हद वयः|	thence they give forth great vital strength which merits praise high power of life that men shall praise.
जयोतिष्मतीमदितिं धारयत्क्षितिं सवर्वतीमा सचेते दिवेदिवे जाग्र्वांसा दिवेदिवे|	with aditi the luminous the celestial upholder of the people come ye day by day ye who watch sleepless day by day.
जयोतिष्मत कषत्रमाशाते आदित्या दानुनस पती|	resplendent might have ye obtained Ādityas lords of liberal gifts.
मित्रस्तयोर्वरुणो यातयज्जनोअर्यमा यातयज्जनः|	movers of men mild both are mitra varuṇa mover of men is aryaman.
अयं मित्राय वरुणाय शन्तमः सोमो भूत्ववपानेष्वाभगो देवो देवेष्वाभगः|	this soma be most sweet to mitra varuṇa he in the drinkingfeasts shall have a share thereof sharing a god among the gods.
तं देवासो जुषेरत विश्वे अद्य सजोषसः|	may all the gods of one accord accept it joyfully today.
तथा राजाना करथो यदिमह रतावाना यदीमहे|	therefore do ye o kings accomplish what we ask ye righteous ones whateer we ask.
यो मित्राय वरुणायाविधज्जनोअनर्वाणं तं परि पातोंहसो दाश्वांसं मर्तमंहसः|	whoso with worship serves mitra and varuṇa him guard ye carefully uninjured from distress guard from distress the liberal man.
तमर्यमाभि रक्षत्य रजूयन्तमनु वरतम|	aryaman guards him well who acts uprightly following his law.
उक्थैर्य एनोः परिभूषति वरतं सतोमैराभूषति वरतम|	who beautifies their service with his lauds who makes it beautiful with songs of praise.
नमो दिवे बर्हते रोदसीभ्यां मित्राय वोचं वरुणाय मीळ्हुषे सुम्र्ळीकाय मीळ्हुषे|	worship will i profess to lofty dyaus to heaven and earth to mitra and to bounteous varuṇa the bounteous the compassionate.
इन्द्रमग्निमुप सतुहि दयुक्षमर्यमणं भगम|	praise indra praise thou agni praise bhaga and heavenly aryaman.
जयोग जीवन्तः परजया सचेमहि सोमस्योती सचेमहि|	long may we live and have attendant progeny have progeny with somas help.
ऊती देवानां वयमिन्द्रवन्तो मंसीमहि सवयशसो मरुद्भिः|	with the gods help with indra still beside us may we be held selfsplendid with the maruts.
अग्निर्मित्रो वरुणः शर्म यंसन तदश्याम मघवानो वयं च|	may agni mitra varuṇa give us shelter this may we gain we and our wealthy princes.
उत तिष्ठ बरह्मणस पते देवयन्तस्त्वेमहे|	o brahmaṆaspati stand up godserving men we pray to thee.
उप पर यन्तु मरुतः सुदानव इन्द्र पराशूर्भवा सचा|	may they who give good gifts the maruts come to us indra most swift be thou with them.
तवामिद धि सहसस पुत्र मर्त्य उपब्रूते धने हिते|	o son of strength each mortal calls to thee for aid when spoil of battle waits for him.
सुवीर्यं मरुत आ सवश्व्यं दधीत यो व आचके|	o maruts may this man who loves you well obtain wealth of good steeds and hero might.
परैतु बरह्मणस पतिः पर देव्येतु सून्र्ता|	may brahmaṇaspati draw nigh may sūnṛtā the goddess come.
अछा वीरंनर्यं पङकतिराधसं देवा यज्ञं नयन्तु नः|	and gods bring to this rite which gives the fivefold gift the hero lover of mankind.
यो वाघते ददाति सूनरं वसु स धत्ते अक्षिति शरवः|	he who bestows a noble guerdon on the priest wins fame that never shall decay.
तस्मा इळां सुवीरामा यजामहे सुप्रतूर्तिमनेहसम|	for him we offer sacred herogiving food peerless and conquering easily.
पर नूनं बरह्मणस पतिर्मन्त्रं वदत्युक्थ्यम|	now brahmaṇaspati speaks forth aloud the solemn hymn of praise.
यस्मिन्निन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा देवा ओकांसि चक्रिरे|	wherein indra and varuṇa mitra aryaman the gods have made their dwelling place.
तमिद वोचेमा विदथेषु शम्भुवं मन्त्रं देवा अनेहसम|	may we in holy synods gods recite that hymn peerless that brings felicity.
इमां च वाचं परतिहर्यथा नरो विश्वेद वामा वो अश्नवत|	if you o heroes graciously accept this word may it obtain all bliss from you.
को देवयन्तमश्नवज्जनं को वर्क्तबर्हिषम|	who shall approach the pious who the man whose sacred grass is trimmed.
परपर दाश्वान पस्त्याभिरस्थितान्तर्वावत कषयं दधे|	the offerer with his folk advances more and more he fills his house with precious things.
उप कष्स्त्रं पर्ञ्चीत हन्ति राजभिर्भये चित सुक्षितिं दधे|	he amplifies his lordly might with kings he slays een mid alarms he dwells secure.
नास्य वर्ता न तरुता महाधने नार्भे अस्ति वज्रिणः|	in great or lesser fight none checks him none subduesthe wielder of the thunderbolt.
पर यद इत्था परावतः शोचिर न मानम अस्यथ|	when thus like flame from far away maruts ye cast your measure forth.
कस्य करत्वा मरुतः कस्य वर्पसा कं याथ कं ह धूतयः|	to whom go ye to whom o shakers of the earth moved by whose wisdom whose design.
सथिरा वः सन्त्व आयुधा पराणुदे वीळू उत परतिष्कभे|	strong let your weapons be to drive away your foes firm for resistance let them be.
युष्माकम अस्तु तविषी पनीयसी मा मर्त्यस्य मायिनः|	yea passing glorious must be your warrior might not as a guileful mortals strength.
परा ह यत सथिरं हथ नरो वर्तयथा गुरु|	when what is strong ye overthrow and whirl about each ponderous thing.
वि याथन वनिनः पर्थिव्या वय आशाः पर्वतानाम|	heroes your course is through the forest trees of earth and through the fissures of the rocks.
नहि वः शत्रुर विविदे अधि दयवि न भूम्यां रिशादसः|	consumers of your foes no enemy of yours is found in heaven or on the earth.
युष्माकम अस्तु तविषी तना युजा रुद्रासो नू चिद आध्र्षे|	ye rudras may the strength held in this bond be yours to bid defiance even now.
पर वेपयन्ति पर्वतान वि विञ्चन्ति वनस्पतीन|	they make the mountains rock and reel they rend the forestkings apart.
परो आरत मरुतो दुर्मदा इव देवासः सर्वया विशा|	onward ye maruts drive like creatures drunk with wine ye gods with all your company.
उपो रथेषु पर्षतीर अयुग्ध्वम परष्टिर वहति रोहितः|	ye to your chariot have yoked the spotted deer a red deer as a leader draws.
आ वो यामाय पर्थिवी चिद अश्रोद अबीभयन्त मानुषाः|	even the earth herself listened as ye came near and men were sorely terrified.
आ वो मक्षू तनाय कं रुद्रा अवो वर्णीमहे|	o rudras quickly we desire your succour for this work of ours.
गन्ता नूनं नो ऽवसा यथा पुरेत्था कण्वाय बिभ्युषे|	come to us with your aid as in the days of old so now for frightened kaṇvas sake.
युष्मेषितो मरुतो मर्त्येषित आ यो नो अभ्व ईषते|	should any monstrous foe o maruts sent by you or sent by mortals threaten us.
वि तं युयोत शवसा वय ओजसा वि युष्माकाभिर ऊतिभिः|	tear ye him from us with your power and with your might and with the succours that are yours.
असामि हि परयज्यवः कण्वं दद परचेतसः|	for ye the worshipful and wise have guarded kaṇva perfectly.
असामिभिर्मरुत आ न ऊतिभिर्गन्ता वर्ष्तिं न विद्युतः|	o maruts come to us with full protecting help as lightning flashes seek the rain.
असाम्योजो बिभ्र्था सुदानवोअसामि धूतयः शवः|	whole strength have ye o bounteous ones perfect earthshakers is your might.
रषिद्विषे मरुतः परिमन्यव इषुं न सर्जत दविषम|	maruts against the poets wrathful enemy send ye an enemy like a dart.
एता उ तया उषसः केतुमक्रत पूर्वे अर्धे रजसो भानुमञ्जते|	these dawns have raised their banner in the eastern half of the midair they spread abroad their shining light.
निष्क्र्ण्वाना आयुधानीव धर्ष्णवः परति गावोऽरुषीर्यन्ति मातरः|	like heroes who prepare their weapons for the war onward they come bright red in hue the mother cows.
उदपप्तन्नरुणा भानवो वर्था सवायुजो अरुषीर्गा अयुक्सत|	readily have the purple beams of light shot up the red cows have they harnessed easy to be yoked.
अक्रन्नुषासो वयुनानि पूर्वथा रुशन्तं भानुमरुषीरशिश्रयुः|	the dawns have brought distinct perception as before redhued they have attained their fulgent brilliancy.
अर्चन्ति नारीरपसो न विष्टिभिः समानेन योजनेना परावतः|	they sing their song like women active in their tasks along their common path hither from far away.
इषं वहन्तीः सुक्र्ते सुदानवे विश्वेदह यजमानाय सुन्वते|	bringing refreshment to the liberal devotee yea all things to the worshipper who pours the juice.
अधि पेशांसि वपते नर्तूरिवापोर्णुते वक्ष उस्रेव बर्जहम|	she like a dancer puts her broidered garments on as a cow yields her udder so she bares her breast.
जयोतिर्विश्वस्मै भुवनाय कर्ण्वती गावो न वरजं वयुषा आवर्तमः|	creating light for all the world of life the dawn hath laid the darkness open as the cows their stall.
परत्यर्ची रुशदस्या अदर्शि वि तिष्ठते बाधते कर्ष्णमभ्वम|	we have beheld the brightness of her shining it spreads and drives away the darksome monster.
सवरुं न पेशो विदथेष्वञ्जञ्चित्रं दिवो दुहिता भानुमश्रेत|	like tints that deck the post at sacrifices heavens daughter hath attained her wondrous splendour.
अतारिष्म तमसस पारमस्योषा उछन्ती वयुना कर्णोति|	we have oerpast the limit of this darkness dawn breaking forth again brings clear perception.
शरिये छन्दो न समयते विभाती सुप्रतीका सौमनसायाजीगः|	she like a flatterer smiles in light for glory and fair of face hath wakened to rejoice us.
भास्वती नेत्री सून्र्तानां दिव सतवे दुहिता गोतमेभिः|	the gotamas have praised heavens radiant daughter the leader of the charm of pleasant voices.
परजावतो नर्वतो अश्वबुध्यानुषो गोग्रानुप मासि वाजान|	dawn thou conferrest on us strength with offspring and men conspicuous with kine and horses.
उषस्तमश्यां यशसं सुवीरं दासप्रवर्गं रयिमश्वबुध्यम|	o thou who shinest forth in wondrous glory urged onward by thy strength auspicious lady.
सुदंससा शरवसा या विभासि वाजप्रसूता सुभगे बर्हन्तम|	dawn may i gain that wealth renowned and ample in brave sons troops of slaves farfamed for horses.
विश्वानि देवी भुवनाभिचक्ष्या परतीची चक्षुरुर्विया वि भाति|	bending her looks on all the world the goddess shines widely spreading with her bright eye westward.
विश्वं जीवं चरसे बोधयन्ती विश्वस्य वाचमविदन मनायोः|	waking to motion every living creature she understands the voice of each adorer.
पुनःपुनर्जायमाना पुराणी समानं वर्णमभि शुम्भमाना|	ancient of days again again born newly decking her beauty with the selfsame raiment.
शवघ्नीव कर्त्नुर्विज आमिनाना मर्तस्य देवी जरयन्त्यायुः|	the goddess wastes away the life of mortals like a skilled hunter cutting birds in pieces.
वयूर्ण्वती दिवो अन्तानबोध्यप सवसारं सनुतर्युयोति|	she hath appeared discovering heavens borders to the far distance she drives off her sister.
परमिनती मनुष्या युगानि योषा जारस्य चक्षसा वि भाति|	diminishing the days of human creatures the lady shines with all her lovers splendour.
पशून न चित्रा सुभगा परथाना सिन्धुर्न कषोद उर्विया वयश्वैत|	the bright the blessed one shines forth extending her rays like kine as a flood rolls his waters.
अमिनती दैव्यानि वरतानि सूर्यस्य चेति रश्मिभिर्द्र्शाना|	never transgressing the divine commandments she is beheld visible with the sunbeams.
उषस्तच्चित्रमा भरास्मभ्यं वाजिनीवति|	o dawn enriched with ample wealth bestow on us the wondrous gift.
येन तोकंच तनयं च धामहे|	wherewith we may support children and childrens sons.
उषो अद्येह गोमत्यश्वावति विभावरि|	thou radiant mover of sweet sounds with wealth of horses and of kine.
रेवदस्मे वयुछ सून्र्तावति|	shine thou on us this day o dawn auspiciously.
युक्ष्वा हि वाजिनीवत्यश्वानद्यारुणानुषः|	o dawn enriched with holy rites yoke to thy car thy purple steeds.
अथा नोविश्वा सौभगान्या वह|	and then bring thou unto us all felicities.
अश्विना वर्तिरस्मदा गोमद दस्रा हिरण्यवत|	o aśvins wonderful in act do ye unanimous direct.
अर्वाग रथं समनसा नि यछतम|	your chariot to our home wealthy in kine and gold.
यावित्था शलोकमा दिवो जयोतिर्जनाय चक्रथुः|	ye who brought down the hymn from heaven a light that giveth light to man.
आ नूर्जं वहतमश्विना युवम|	do ye o aśvins bring strength hither unto us.
एह देवा मयोभुवा दस्रा हिरण्यवर्तनी|	hither may they who wake at dawn bring to drink soma both the gods.
उषर्बुधो वहन्तु सोमपीतये|	healthgivers wonderworkers borne on paths of gold.
कस्य नूनं कतमस्याम्र्तानां मनामहे चारु देवस्य नाम|	who now is he what god among immortals of whose auspicious name we may bethink us.
को नो मह्या अदितये पुनर्दात पितरं च दर्शेयं मातरं च|	who shall to mighty aditi restore us that i may see my father and my mother.
अग्नेर्वयं परथमस्याम्र्तानां मनामहे चारु देवस्य नाम|	agni the god the first among the immortalsof his auspicious name let us bethink us.
स नो मह्या अदितये पुनर्दात पितरं च दर्शेयं मातरं च|	he shall to mighty aditi restore us that i may see my father and my mother.
अभि तवा देव सवितरीशानं वार्याणाम|	to thee o savitar the lord of precious things who helpest us.
सदावन भागमीमहे|	continually for our share we come.
यश्चिद धि त इत्था भगः शशमानः पुरा निदः|	wealth highly lauded ere reproach hath fallen on it which is laid.
अद्वेषो हस्तयोर्दधे|	free from all hatred in thy hands.
भगभक्तस्य ते वयमुदशेम तवावसा|	through thy protection may we come to even the height of affluence.
मूर्धानं राय आरभे|	which bhaga hath dealt out to us.
नहि ते कषत्रं न सहो न मन्युं वयश्चनामी पतयन्त आपुः|	neer have those birds that fly through air attained to thy high dominion or thy might or spirit.
नेमा आपो अनिमिषं चरन्तीर्न ये वातस्य परमिनन्त्यभ्वम|	nor these the waters that flow on for ever nor hills abaters of the winds wild fury.
अबुध्ने राजा वरुणो वनस्योर्ध्वं सतूपं ददते पूतदक्षः|	varuṇa king of hallowed might sustaineth erect the trees stem in the baseless region.
नीचीना सथुरुपरि बुध्न एषामस्मे अन्तर्निहिताःकेतवः सयुः|	its rays whose root is high above stream downward deep may they sink within us and be hidden.
उरुं हि राजा वरुणश्चकार सूर्याय पन्थामन्वेतवा उ|	king varuṇa hath made a spacious pathway a pathway for the sun wherein to travel.
अपदे पादा परतिधातवेअकरुतापवक्ता हर्दयाविधश्चित|	where no way was he made him set his footstep and warned afar whateer afflicts the spirit.
शतं ते राजन भिषजः सहस्रमुर्वी गभीरा सुमतिष टे अस्तु|	a hundred balms are thine o king a thousand deep and widereaching also be thy favours.
बाधस्व दूरे निरतिं पराचैः कर्तं चिदेनः पर मुमुग्ध्यस्मत|	far from us far away drive thou destruction put from us een the sin we have committed.
अमी य रक्षा निहितास उच्चा नक्तं दद्र्श्रे कुह चिद दिवेयुः|	whither by day depart the constellations that shine at night set high in heaven above us.
अदब्धानि वरुणस्य वरतानि विचाकशच्चन्द्रमा नक्तमेति|	varuṇas holy laws remain unweakened and through the night the moon moves on in splendor.
तत तवा यामि बरह्मणा वन्दमानस्तदा शास्ते यजमानो हविर्भिः|	i ask this of thee with my prayer adoring thy worshipper craves this with his oblation.
अहेळमानो वरुणेह बोध्युरुशंस मा न आयुःप्र मोषीः|	varuṇa stay thou here and be not angry steal not our life from us o thou wideruler.
तदिन नक्तं तद दिवा मह्यमाहुस्तदयं केतो हर्द आ वि चष्टे|	nightly and daily this one thing they tell me this too the thought of mine own heart repeateth.
शुनःशेपो यमह्वद गर्भीतः सो अस्मान राजा वरुणो मुमोक्तु|	may he to whom prayed fettered Śunaḥśepa may he the sovran varuṇa release us.
शुनःशेपो हयह्वद गर्भीतस्त्रिष्वादित्यं दरुपदेषु बद्धः|	bound to three pillars captured Śunaḥśepa thus to the Āditya made his supplication.
अवैनं राजा वरुणः सस्र्ज्याद विद्वानदब्धो वि मुमोक्तु पाशान|	him may the sovran varuṇa deliver wise neer deceived loosen the bonds that bind him.
अव ते हेळो वरुण नमोभिरव यज्ञेभिरीमहे हविर्भिः|	with bending down oblations sacrifices o varuṇa we deprecate thine anger.
कषयन्नस्मभ्यमसुर परचेता राजन्नेनांसि शिश्रथः कर्तानि|	wise asura thou king of wide dominion loosen the bonds of sins by us committed.
उदुत्तमं वरुण पाशमस्मदवाधमं वि मध्यमं शरथाय|	loosen the bonds o varuṇa that hold me loosen the bonds above between and under.
अथा वयमादित्य वरते तवानागसो अदितये सयाम|	so in thy holy law may we made sinless belong to aditi o thou Āditya.
ते हि दयावाप्र्थिवी विश्वशम्भुव रतावरी रजसो धारयत्कवी|	these heaven and earth bestow prosperity on all sustainers of the region holy ones and wise.
सुजन्मनी धिषणे अन्तरीयते देवो देवी धर्मणा सूर्यः शुचिः|	two bowls of noble kind between these goddesses the god the fulgent sun travels by fixed decree.
उरुव्यचसा महिनी असश्चता पिता माता च भुवनानि रक्षतः|	widelycapacious pair mighty that never fail the father and the mother keep all creatures safe.
सुध्र्ष्टमे वपुष्ये न रोदसी पिता यत सीमभि रूपैरवासयत|	the two worldhalves the spirited the beautiful because the father hath clothed them in goodly forms.
स वह्निः पुत्रः पित्रोः पवित्रवान पुनाति धीरो भुवनानि मायया|	son of these parents he the priest with power to cleanse sage sanctifies the worlds with his surpassing power.
धेनुं च पर्श्निं वर्षभं सुरेतसं विश्वाहा शुक्रं पयो अस्य दुक्षत|	thereto for his bright milk he milked through all the days the partycoloured cow and the prolific bull.
अयं देवानामपसामपस्तमो यो जजान रोदसी विश्वशम्भुवा|	among the skilful gods most skilled is he who made the two worldhalves which bring prosperity to all.
वि यो ममे रजसी सुक्रतूययाजरेभि सकम्भनेभिःसमान्र्चे|	who with great wisdom measured both the regions out and stablished them with pillars that shall neer decay.
ते नो गर्णाने महिनी महि शरवः कषत्रं दयावाप्र्थिवी धासथो बर्हत|	extolled in song o heaven and earth bestow on us ye mighty pair great glory and high lordly sway.
येनाभि कर्ष्टीस्ततनाम विश्वहा पनाय्यमोजो अस्मे समिन्वतम|	whereby we may extend ourselves ever over the folk and send us strength that shall deserve the praise of men.
दवे वीरूपे चरतः सवर्थे अन्यान्या वत्समुप धापयेते|	to fair goals travel two unlike in semblance each in succession nourishes an infant.
हरिरन्यस्यां भवति सवधावाञ्छुक्रो अन्यस्यां दद्र्शे सुवर्चाः|	one bears a godlike babe of golden colour bright and fairshining is he with the other.
दशेमं तवष्टुर्जनयन्त गर्भमतन्द्रासो युवतयो विभ्र्त्रम|	tvaṣṭars ten daughters vigilant and youthful produced this infant borne to sundry quarters.
तिग्मानीकं सवयशसं जनेषु विरोचमानं परि षीं नयन्ति|	they bear around him whose long flames are pointed fulgent among mankind with native splendour.
तरीणि जाना परि भूषन्त्यस्य समुद्र एकं दिव्येकमप्सु|	three several places of his birth they honour in midair in the heaven and in the waters.
पूर्वामनु पर दिशं पार्थिवानां रतून परशासद विदधावनुष्ठु|	governing in the east of earthly regions the seasons hath he stablished in their order.
क इमं वो निण्यमा चिकेत वत्सो मातॄर्जनयत सवधाभिः|	who of you knows this secret one the infant by his own nature hath brought forth his mothers.
बह्वीनां गर्भो अपसामुपस्थान महान कविर्निश्चरति सवधावान|	the germ of many from the waters bosom he goes forth wise and great of godlike nature.
आविष्ट्यो वर्धते चारुरासु जिह्मानामूर्ध्वः सवयशा उपस्थे|	visible fair he grows in native brightness uplifted in the lap of waving waters.
उभे तवष्टुर्बिभ्यतुर्जायमानात परतीची सिंहम्प्रति जोषयेते|	when he was born both tvaṣṭars worlds were frightened they turn to him and reverence the lion.
उभे भद्रे जोषयेते न मेने गावो न वाश्रा उप तस्थुरेवैः|	the two auspicious ones like women tend him like lowing cows they seek him in their manner.
स दक्षाणां दक्षपतिर्बभूवाञ्जन्ति यं दक्षिणतो हविर्भिः|	he is the lord of might among the mighty him on the right they balm with their oblations.
उद यंयमीति सवितेव बाहू उभे सिचौ यतते भीम रञ्जन|	like savitar his arms with might he stretches awful he strives grasping the worlds two borders.
उच्छुक्रमत्कमजते सिमस्मान नवा मात्र्भ्यो वसना जहाति|	he forces out from all a brilliant vesture yea from his mothers draws he forth new raiment.
तवेषं रूपं कर्णुत उत्तरं यत सम्प्र्ञ्चानः सदने गोभिरद्भिः|	he makes him a most noble form of splendour decking him in his home with milk and waters.
कविर्बुध्नं परि मर्म्र्ज्यते धीः सा देवताता समितिर्बभूव|	the sage adorns the depths of air with wisdom this is the meeting where the gods are worshipped.
उरु ते जरयः पर्येति बुध्नं विरोचमानं महिषस्य धाम|	wide through the firmament spreads forth triumphant the farresplendent strength of thee the mighty.
विश्वेभिरग्ने सवयशोभिरिद्धोअदब्धेभिः पायुभिः पाह्यस्मान|	kindled by us do thou preserve us agni with all thy selfbright undiminished succours.
धन्वन सरोतः कर्णुते गातुमूर्मिं शुक्रैरूर्मिभिरभिनक्षति कषाम|	in dry spots he makes stream and course and torrent and inundates the earth with floods that glisten.
विश्वा सनानि जठरेषु धत्तेअन्तर्नवासु चरति परसूषु|	all ancient things within his maw he gathers and moves among the new freshsprouting grasses.
एवा नो अग्ने समिधा वर्धानो रेवत पावक शरवसे वि भाहि|	fed with our fuel purifying agni so blaze to us auspiciously for glory.
तन नो मित्रो वरुणो मामहन्ताम अदितिः सिन्धुः पर्थ्विवी उतो दयौः|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
स यो वर्षा वर्ष्ण्येभिः समोका महो दिवः पर्थिव्याश्चसम्राट|	may he who hath his home with strength the mighty the king supreme of earth and spacious heaven.
सतीनसत्वा हव्यो भरेषु मरुत्वान नो भवत्विन्द्र ऊती|	lord of true power to he invoked in battlesmay indra girt by maruts be our succour.
यस्यानाप्तः सूर्यस्येव यामो भरेभरे वर्त्रहा शुष्मो अस्ति|	whose way is unattainable like sūryas he in each fight is the strong vṛtraslayer.
वर्षन्तमः सखिभिः सवेभिरेवैर्म|	mightiest with his friends in his own courses may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
दिवो न यस्य रेतसो दुघानाः पन्थासो यन्ति शवसापरीताः|	whose paths go forth in their great might resistless forthmilking as it were heavens genial moisture.
तरद्द्वेषाः सासहिः पौंस्येभिर्म|	with manly strength triumphant foesubduermay indra girt by maruts be our succour.
सो अङगिरोभिरङगिरस्तमो भूद वर्षा वर्षभिः सखिभिः सखा सन|	among aṅgirases he was the chiefest a friend with friends mighty amid the mighty.
रग्मिभिर्र्ग्मी गातुभिर्ज्येष्ठो म|	praiser mid praisers honoured most of singers may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
स सूनुभिर्न रुद्रेभिर्र्भ्वा नर्षाह्ये सासह्वानमित्रान|	strong with the rudras as with his own children in manly battle conquering his foemen.
सनीळेभिः शरवस्यानि तूर्वन म|	with his close comrades doing deeds of glorymay indra girt by maruts be our succour.
स मन्युमीः समदनस्य कर्तास्माकेभिर्न्र्भिः सूर्यं सनत|	humbler of pride exciter of the conflict the lord of heroes god invoked of many.
अस्मिन्नहन सत्पतिः पुरुहूतो म|	may he this day gain with our men the sunlight may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
तमूतयो रणयञ्छूरसातौ तं कषेमस्य कषितयः कर्ण्वत तराम|	his help hath made him cheerer in the battle the folk have made him guardian of their comfort.
स विश्वस्य करुणस्येश एको म|	sole lord is he of every holy service may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
तमप्सन्त शवस उत्सवेषु नरो नरमवसे तं धनाय|	to him the hero on high days of prowess heroes for help and booty shall betake them.
सो अन्धे चित तमसि जयोतिर्विदन म|	he hath found light even in the blinding darkness may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
स सव्येन यमति वराधतश्चित स दक्षिणे संग्र्भीता कर्तानि|	he with his left hand checketh even the mighty and with his right hand gathereth up the booty.
स कीरिणा चित सनिता धनानि म|	even with the humble he acquireth riches may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
स गरामेभिः सनिता स रथेभिर्विदे विश्वाभिः कर्ष्टिभिर्न्वद्य|	with hosts on foot and cars he winneth treasures well is he known this day by all the people.
स पौंस्येभिरभिभूरशस्तीर्म|	with manly might he conquereth those who hate him may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
स जामिभिर्यत समजाति मीळ्हेअजामिभिर्वा पुरुहूत एवैः|	when in his ways with kinsmen or with strangers he speedeth to the fight invoked of many.
अपां तोकस्य तनयस्य जेषे म|	for gain of waters and of sons and grandsons may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
स वज्रभ्र्द दस्युहा भीम उग्रः सहस्रचेताः शतनीथर्भ्वा|	awful and fierce fiendslayer thunderwielder with boundless knowledge hymned by hundreds mighty.
चम्रीषो न शवसा पाञ्चजन्यो म|	in strength like soma guard of the five peoples may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
तस्य वज्रः करन्दति समत सवर्षा दिवो न तवेषो रवथःशिमीवान|	winning the light hitherward roars his thunder like the terrific mighty voice of heaven.
तं सचन्ते सनयस्तं धनानि म|	rich gifts and treasures evermore attend him may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
यस्याजस्रं शवसा मानमुक्थं परिभुजद रोदसी विश्वतः सीम|	whose home eternal through his strength surrounds him on every side his laud the earth and heaven.
स पारिषत करतुभिर्मन्दसानो म|	may he delighted with our service save us may indra girt by maruts be our succour.
न यस्य देवा देवता न मर्ता आपश्चन शवसो अन्तमापुः|	the limit of whose power not gods by godhead nor mortal men have reached nor yet the waters.
स पररिक्वा तवक्षसा कष्मो दिवश्च म|	both earth and heaven in vigour he surpasseth may indra girt by maruts he our succour.
रोहिच्छ्यावा सुमदंशुर्ललामीर्द्युक्षा राय रज्राश्वस्य|	the red and tawny mare blazemarked high standing celestial who to bring Ṛjrāśva riches.
वर्षण्वन्तं बिभ्रती धूर्षु रथं मन्द्रा चिकेत नाहुषीषु विक्षु|	drew at the pole the chariot yoked with stallions joyous among the hosts of men was noted.
एतत तयत त इन्द्र वर्ष्ण उक्थं वार्षागिरा अभि गर्णन्ति राधः|	the vārṣāgiras unto thee o indra the mighty one sing forth this laud to please thee.
रज्राश्वः परष्टिभिरम्बरीषः सहदेवो भयमानः सुराधाः|	Ṛjrāśva with his fellows ambarīṣa surādhas sahadeva bhayamāna.
दस्यूञ्छिम्यूंश्च पुरुहूत एवैर्हत्वा पर्थिव्यां शर्वा नि बर्हीत|	he much invoked hath slain dasyus and Śimyus after his wont and laid them low with arrows.
सनत कषेत्रं सखिभिः शवित्न्येभिः सनत्सूर्यं सनदपः सुवज्रः|	the mighty thunderer with his faircomplexioned friends won the land the sunlight and the waters.
विश्वाहेन्द्रो अधिवक्ता नो अस्त्वपरिह्व्र्ताः सनुयाम वाजम|	may indra evermore be our protector and unimperilled may we win the booty.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
ऐभिरग्ने दुवो गिरो विश्वेभिः सोमपीतये|	to drink the soma agni come to our service and our songs.
देवेभिर्याहि यक्षि च|	with all these gods and worship them.
आ तवा कण्वा अहूषत गर्णन्ति विप्र ते धियः|	the kaṇvas have invoked thee they o singer sing thee songs of praise.
देवेभिरग्न आ गहि|	agni come hither with the gods.
इन्द्रवायू बर्हस्पतिं मित्राग्निं पूषणं भगम|	indra vāyu bṛhaspati mitra agni pūṣan bhaga.
आदित्यान्मारुतं गणम|	Ādityas and the marut host.
पर वो भरियन्त इन्दवो मत्सरा मादयिष्णवः|	for you these juices are poured forth that gladden and exhilarate.
दरप्सा मध्वश्चमूषदः|	the meathdrops resting in the cup.
ईळते तवामवस्यवः कण्वासो वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	the sons of kaṇva fain for help adore thee having strewn the grass.
हविष्मन्तोरंक्र्तः|	with offerings and all things prepared.
घर्तप्र्ष्ठा मनोयुजो ये तवा वहन्ति वह्नयः|	let the swift steeds who carry thee thoughtyoked and dropping holy oil.
आ देवान सोमपीतये|	bring the gods to the soma draught.
तान यजत्रान रताव्र्धोअग्ने पत्नीवतस कर्धि|	adored the strengtheners of law unite them agni with their dames.
मध्वः सुजिह्व पायय|	make them drink meath o bright of tongue.
ये यजत्रा य ईड्यास्ते ते पिबन्तु जिह्वया|	let them o agni who deserve worship and praise drink with thy tongue.
मधोरग्ने वषट्क्र्ति|	the meath in solemn sacrifice.
आकीं सूर्यस्य रोचनाद विश्वान देवानुषर्बुधः|	away from the suns realm of light the wise invoking priest shall bring.
विप्रो होतेह वक्षति|	all gods awaking with the dawn.
विश्वेभिः सोम्यं मध्वग्न इन्द्रेण वायुना|	with all the gods with indra with vāyu and mitras splendours drink.
पिबा मित्रस्य धामभिः|	agni the pleasant soma juice.
तवं होता मनुर्हितोअग्ने यज्ञेषु सीदसि|	ordained by manu as our priest thou sittest agni at each rite.
सेमं नो अध्वरं यज|	hallow thou this our sacrifice.
युक्ष्वा हयरुषी रथे हरितो देव रोहितः|	harness the red mares to thy car the bays o god the flaming ones.
ताभिर्देवानिहा वह|	with those bring hitherward the gods.
नू चित सहोजा अम्र्तो नि तुन्दते होता यद दूतो अभवद विवस्वतः|	neer waxeth faint the immortal son of strength since he the herald hath become vivasvāns messenger.
वि साधिष्ठेभिः पथिभी रजो मम आ देवताताहविषा विवासति|	on paths most excellent he measured out midair he with oblation calls to service of the gods.
आ सवमद्म युवमानो अजरस्त्र्ष्वविष्यन्नतसेषु तिष्ठति|	never decaying seizing his appropriate food rapidly eagerly through the dry wood he spreads.
अत्यो न पर्ष्ठं परुषितस्य रोचते दिवो न सानु सतनयन्नचिक्रदत|	his back as he is sprinkled glistens like a horse loud hath he roared and shouted like the heights of heaven.
कराणा रुद्रेभिर्वसुभिः पुरोहितो होता निषत्तो रयिषाळमर्त्यः|	set high in place oer all that vasus rudras do immortal lord of riches seated as high priest.
रथो न विक्ष्व रञ्जसान आयुषु वयानुषग वार्या देव रण्वति|	hastening like a car to men to those who live the god without delay gives boons to be desired.
वि वातजूतो अतसेषु तिष्ठते वर्था जुहूभिः सर्ण्या तुविष्वणिः|	urged by the wind be spreads through dry wood as he lists armed with his tongues for sickles with a mighty roar.
तर्षु यदग्ने वनिनो वर्षायसे कर्ष्णं त एम रुशदूर्मे अजर|	black is thy path agni changeless with glittering waves when like a bull thou rushest eager to the trees.
तपुर्जम्भो वन आ वातचोदितो यूथे न साह्वानव वाति वंसगः|	with teeth of flame winddriven through the wood he speeds triumphant like a bull among the herd of cows.
अभिव्रजन्नक्षितं पाजसा रजः सथातुश्चरथं भयते पतत्रिणः|	with bright strength roaming to the everlasting air things fixed things moving quake before him as he flies.
दधुष टवा भर्गवो मानुषेष्वा रयिं न चारुं सुहवं जनेभ्यः|	the bhṛgus established thee among mankind for men like as a treasure beauteous easy to invoke.
होतारमग्ने अतिथिं वरेण्यं मित्रं न शेवं दिव्याय जन्मने|	thee agni as a herald and choiceworthy guest as an auspicious friend to the celestial race.
होतारं सप्त जुह्वो यजिष्ठं यं वाघतो वर्णते अध्वरेषु|	agni the seven tongues deftest sacrificer him whom the priests elect at solemn worship.
अग्निं विश्वेषामरतिं वसूनां सपर्यामि परयसा यामि रत्नम|	the herald messenger of all the vasus i serve with dainty food i ask for riches.
अछिद्रा सूनो सहसो नो अद्य सतोत्र्भ्यो मित्रमहः शर्म यछ|	grant son of strength thou rich in friends a refuge without a flaw this day to us thy praisers.
अग्ने गर्णन्तमंहस उरुष्योर्जो नपात पूर्भिरायसीभिः|	o agni son of strength with forts of iron preserve thou from distress the man who lauds thee.
भवा वरूथं गर्णते विभावो भवा मघवन मघवद्भ्यःशर्म|	be thou a refuge bright one to the singer a shelter bounteous lord to those who worship.
उरुष्याग्ने अंहसो गर्णन्तं परातर्मक्षू धियावसुर्जगम्यात|	preserve the singer from distress o agni may he enriched with prayer come soon and early.
अग्निं दूतं वर्णीमहे होतारं विश्ववेदसम|	we choose agni the messenger the herald master of all wealth.
अस्य यज्ञस्य सुक्रतुम|	well skilled in this our sacrifice.
अग्निमअग्निं हवीमभिः सदा हवन्त विश्पतिम|	with callings ever they invoke agni agni lord of the house.
हव्यवाहं पुरुप्रियम|	oblationbearer much beloved.
अग्ने देवानिहा वह जज्ञानो वर्क्तबर्हिषे|	bring the gods hither agni born for him who strews the sacred grass.
असि होता न ईड्यः|	thou art our herald meet for praise.
तानुशतो वि बोधय यदग्ने यासि दूत्यम|	wake up the willing gods since thou agni performest embassage.
देवैरा सत्सि बर्हिषि|	sit on the sacred grass with gods.
घर्ताहवन दीदिवः परति षम रिषतो दह|	o agni radiant one to whom the holy oil is poured burn up.
अग्ने तवं रक्षस्विनः|	our enemies whom fiends protect.
अग्निनाग्निः समिध्यते कविर्ग्र्हपतिर्युवा|	by agni agni is inflamed lord of the house wise young who bears.
हव्यवाड जुह्वास्यः|	the gift the ladle is his mouth.
कविमग्निमुप सतुहि सत्यधर्माणमध्वरे|	praise agni in the sacrifice the sage whose ways are ever true.
देवममीवचातनम|	the god who driveth grief away.
यस्त्वामग्ने हविष्पतिर्दूतं देव सपर्यति|	god agni be his strong defence who lord of sacrificial gifts.
तस्य सम पराविता भव|	worshippeth thee the messenger.
यो अग्निं देववीतये हविष्मानाविवासति|	whoso with sacred gift would fain call agni to the feast of gods.
तस्मै पावक मर्ळय|	o purifier favour him.
स नः पावक दीदिवोअग्ने देवानिहा वह|	such agni purifier bright bring hither to our sacrifice.
उप यज्ञं हविश्च नः|	to our oblation bring the gods.
स न सतवान आ भर गायत्रेण नवीयसा|	so lauded by our newest song of praise bring opulence to us.
रयिं वीरवतीमिषम|	and food with heroes for our sons.
अग्ने शुक्रेण शोचिषा विश्वाभिर्देवहूतिभिः|	o agni by effulgent flame by all invokings of the gods.
इमं सतोमं जुषस्व नः|	show pleasure in this laud of ours.
कद ध नूनं कधप्रियः पिता पुत्रं न हस्तयोः|	what now when will ye take us by both hands as a dear sire his son.
दधिध्वे वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	gods for whom sacred grass is clipped.
कव नूनं कद वो अर्थं गन्ता दिवो न पर्थिव्याः|	now whither to what goal of yours go ye in heaven and not on earth.
कव वो गावो न रण्यन्ति|	where do your cows disport themselves.
कव वः सुम्ना नव्यांसि मरुतः कव सुविता|	where are your newest favours shown where maruts your prosperity.
कव विश्वानि सौभगा|	where all your high felicities.
यद यूयम पर्श्निमातरो मर्तासः सयातन|	if o ye maruts ye the sons whom pṛśni bore were mortal and.
सतोता वो अम्र्तः सयात|	immortal he who sings your praise.
मा वो मर्गो न यवसे जरिता भूद अजोष्यः|	then never were your praiser loathed like a wild beast in pastureland.
पथा यमस्य गाद उप|	nor should he go on yamas path.
मो षु णः परापरा निर्र्तिर दुर्हणा वधीत|	let not destructive plague on plague hard to be conquered strike its down.
पदीष्ट तर्ष्णया सह|	let each with drought depart from us.
सत्यं तवेषा अमवन्तो धन्वञ चिद आ रुद्रियासः|	truly they the fierce and mighty sons of rudra send their windless.
मिहं कर्ण्वन्त्य अवाताम|	rain een on the desert places.
वाश्रेव विद्युन मिमाति वत्सं न माता सिषक्ति|	like a cow the lightning lows and follows motherlike her youngling.
यद एषां वर्ष्टिर असर्जि|	when their rainflood hath been loosened.
दिवा चित तमः कर्ण्वन्ति पर्जन्येनोदवाहेन|	when they inundate the earth they spread forth darkness een in day time.
यत पर्थिवीं वयुन्दन्ति|	with the waterladen raincloud.
अध सवनान मरुतां विश्वम आ सद्म पार्थिवम|	o maruts at your voices sound this earthly habitation shakes.
अरेजन्त पर मानुषाः|	and each man reels who dwells therein.
मरुतो वीळुपाणिभिश चित्रा रोधस्वतीर अनु|	o maruts with your stronghoofed steeds unhindered in their courses haste.
यातेम अखिद्रयामभिः|	along the bright embanked streams.
सथिरा वः सन्तु नेमयो रथा अश्वास एषाम|	firm be the fellies of your wheels steady your horses and your cars.
सुसंस्क्र्ता अभीशवः|	and may your reins be fashioned well.
अछा वदा तना गिरा जरायै बरह्मणस पतिम|	invite thou hither with this song for praise agni the lord of prayer.
अग्निम मित्रं न दर्शतम|	him who is fair as mitra is.
मिमीहि शलोकम आस्यपर्जन्य इव ततनः|	form in thy mouth the hymn of praise expand thee like a rainy cloud.
गाय गायत्रम उक्थ्यम|	sing forth the measured eulogy.
वन्दस्व मारुतं गणं तवेषम पनस्युम अर्किणम|	sing glory to the marut host praiseworthy tuneful vigorous.
अस्मे वर्द्धा असन्न इह|	here let the strong ones dwell with us.
तवमग्ने परथमो अङगिरा रषिर्देवो देवानामभवः शिवः सखा|	thou agni wast the earliest aṅgiras a seer thou wast a god thyself the gods auspicious friend.
तव वरते कवयो विद्मनापसोअजायन्त मरुतो भराजद्र्ष्टयः|	after thy holy ordinance the maruts sage active through wisdom with their glittering spears were born.
तवमग्ने परथमो अङगिरस्तमः कविर्देवानां परि भूषसिव्रतम|	o agni thou the best and earliest aṅgiras fulfillest as a sage the holy law of gods.
विभुर्विश्वस्मै भुवनाय मेधिरो दविमाता शयुः कतिधा चिदायवे|	sprung from two mothers wise through all existence spread resting in many a place for sake of living man.
तवमग्ने परथमो मातरिश्वन आविर्भव सुक्रतूया विवस्वते|	to mātariśvan first thou agni wast disclosed and to vivasvān through thy noble inward power.
अरेजेतां रोदसी होत्र्वूर्येअसघ्नोर्भारमयजो महोवसो|	heaven and earth vasu shook at the choosing of the priest the burthen thou didst bear didst worship mighty gods.
तवमग्ने मनवे दयामवाशयः पुरूरवसे सुक्र्ते सुक्र्त्तरः|	agni thou madest heaven to thunder for mankind thou yet more pious for pious purūravas.
शवात्रेण यत पित्रोर्मुच्यसे पर्या तवा पूर्वमनयन्नापरं पुनः|	when thou art rapidly freed from thy parents first eastward they bear thee round and after to the west.
तवमग्ने वर्षभः पुष्टिवर्धन उद्यतस्रुचे भवसि शरवाय्यः|	thou agni art a bull who makes our store increase to be invoked by him who lifts the ladle up.
य आहुतिं परि वेदा वषट्क्र्तिमेकायुरग्रे विश आविवाससि|	well knowing the oblation with the hallowing word uniting all who live thou lightenest first our folk.
तवमग्ने वर्जिनवर्तनिं नरं सक्मन पिपर्षि विदथे विचर्षणे|	agni thou savest in the synod when pursued een him farseeing one who walks in evil ways.
यः शूरसाता परितक्म्ये धने दभ्रेभिश्चित सम्र्ताहंसि भूयसः|	thou when the heroes fight for spoil which men rush round slayest in war the many by the hands of few.
तवं तमग्ने अम्र्तत्व उत्तमे मर्तं दधासि शरवसे दिवे दिवे|	for glory agni day by day thou liftest up the mortal man to highest immortality.
यस्तात्र्षाण उभयाय जन्मने मयः कर्णोषि परया च सूरये|	even thou who yearning for both races givest them great bliss and to the prince grantest abundant food.
तवं नो अग्ने सनये धनानां यशसं कारुं कर्णुहि सतवानः|	o agni highly lauded make our singer famous that he may win us store of riches.
रध्याम कर्मापसा नवेन देवैर्द्यावाप्र्थिवी परावतं नः|	may we improve the rite with new performance o earth and heaven with all the gods protect us.
तवं नो अग्ने पित्रोरुपस्थ आ देवो देवेष्वनवद्य जाग्र्विः|	o blameless agni lying in thy parents lap a god among the gods be watchful for our good.
तनूक्र्द बोधि परमतिश्च कारवे तवं कल्याण वसु विश्वमोपिषे|	former of bodies be the singers providence all good things hast thou sown for him auspicious one.
तवमग्ने परमतिस्त्वं पितासि नस्त्वं वयस्क्र्त तव जामयो वयम|	agni thou art our providence our father thou we are thy brethren and thou art our spring of life.
सं तवा रायः शतिनः सं सहस्रिणः सुवीरं यन्ति वरतपामदाभ्य|	in thee rich in good heroes guard of high decrees meet hundred thousand treasures o infallible.
तवामग्ने परथममायुमायवे देवा अक्र्ण्वन नहुषस्य विश्पतिम|	thee agni have the gods made the first living one for living man lord of the house of nahuṣa.
इळामक्र्ण्वन मनुषस्य शासनीं पितुर्यत पुत्रो ममकस्य जायते|	iḷā they made the teacher of the sons of men what time a son was born to the father of my race.
तवं नो अग्ने तव देव पायुभिर्मघोनो रक्ष तन्वश्च वन्द्य|	worthy to be revered o agni god preserve our wealthy patrons with thy succours and ourselves.
तराता तोकस्य तनये गवामस्यनिमेषं रक्षमाणस्तव वरते|	guard of our seed art thou aiding our cows to bear incessantly protecting in thy holy way.
तवमग्ने यज्यवे पायुरन्तरोअनिषङगाय चतुरक्ष इध्यसे|	agni thou art a guard close to the pious man kindled art thou foureyed for him who is unarmed.
यो रातहव्योअव्र्काय धायसे कीरेश्चिन मन्त्रं मनसावनोषि तम|	with fond heart thou acceptest een the poor mans prayer when he hath brought his gift to gain security.
तवमग्न उरुशंसाय वाघते सपार्हं यद रेक्णः परमं वनोषि तत|	thou agni gainest for the loudlypraising priest the highest wealth the object of a mans desire.
आध्रस्य चित परमतिरुच्यसे पिता पर पाकंशास्सि पर दिशो विदुष्टरः|	thou art called father caring even for the weak and wisest to the simple one thou teachest lore.
तवमग्ने परयतदक्षिणं नरं वर्मेव सयूतं परि पासि विश्वतः|	agni the man who giveth guerdon to the priests like wellsewn armour thou guardest on every side.
सवादुक्षद्मा यो वसतौ सयोनक्र्ज्जीवयाजं यजते सोपमा दिवः|	he who with grateful food shows kindness in his house an offerer to the living is the type of heaven.
इमामग्ने शरणिं मीम्र्षो न इममध्वानं यमगाम दूरात|	pardon we pray this sin of ours o agnithe path which we have trodden widely straying.
आपिः पिता परमतिः सोम्यानां भर्मिरस्य रषिक्र्न मर्त्यानाम|	dear friend and father caring for the pious who speedest nigh and who inspirest mortals.
मनुष्वदग्ने अङगिरस्वदङगिरो ययातिवत सदने पूर्ववच्छुचे|	as erst to manus to yayāti aṅgiras so aṅgiras pure agni come thou to our hall.
अछ याह्या वहा दैव्यं जनमा सादय बर्हिषि यक्षि च परियम|	bring hither the celestial host and seat them here upon the sacred grass and offer what they love.
एतेनाग्ने बरह्मणा वाव्र्धस्व शक्ती वा यत ते चक्र्मा विदा वा|	by this our prayer be thou o agni strengthened prayer made by us after our power and knowledge.
उत पर णेष्यभि वस्यो अस्मान सं नः सर्ज सुमत्या वाजवत्या|	lead thou us therefore to increasing riches endow us with thy strengthbestowing favour.
यज्ञो देवानां परत्येति सुम्नमादित्यासो भवता मर्ळयन्तः|	the sacrifice obtains the gods acceptance be graciously inclined to us Ādityas.
आ वोअर्वाची सुमतिर्वव्र्त्यादंहोश्चिद या वरिवोवित्तरासत|	hitherward let your favour be directed and be our best deliverer from trouble.
उप नो देवा अवसा गमन्त्वङगिरसां सामभिः सतूयमानाः|	by praisesongs of aṅgirases exalted may the gods come to us with their protection.
इन्द्र इन्द्रियैर्मरुतो मरुद्भिरादित्यैर्नो अदितिः शर्म यंसत|	may indra with his powers maruts with maruts aditi with Ādityas grant us shelter.
तन न इन्द्रस्तद वरुणस्तदग्निस्तदर्यमा तत सविताचनो धात|	this laud of ours may varuṇa and indra aryaman agni savitar find pleasant.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
एषो उषा अपूर्व्य वयुछति परिया दिवः|	now morning with her earliest light shines forth dear daughter of the sky.
सतुषे वामश्विना बर्हत|	high aśvins i extol your praise.
या दस्रा सिन्धुमातरा मनोतरा रयीणाम|	sons of the sea mighty to save discoverers of riches ye.
धिया देवा वसुविदा|	gods with deep thought who find out wealth.
वच्यन्ते वां ककुहासो जूर्णायामधि विष्टपि|	your giant coursers hasten on over the region all in flames.
यद वांरथो विभिष पतात|	when your car flies with winged steeds.
हविषा जारो अपां पिपर्ति पपुरिर्नरा|	he liberal lover of the flood lord of the house the vigilant.
पिता कुटस्य चर्षणिः|	chiefs with oblations feeds you full.
आदारो वां मतीनां नासत्या मतवचसा|	ye have regard unto our hymns nāsatyas thinking of our words.
पातं सोमस्य धर्ष्णुया|	drink boldly of the soma juice.
या नः पीपरदश्विना जयोतिष्मती तमस्तिरः|	vouchsafe to us o aśvin pair such strength as with attendant light.
तामस्मे रासाथामिषम|	may through the darkness carry us.
आ नो नावा मतीनां यातं पाराय गन्तवे|	come in the ship of these our hymns to bear you to the hither shore.
युञ्जाथामश्विना रथम|	o aśvins harness ye the car.
अरित्रं वां दिवस पर्थु तीर्थे सिन्धूनां रथः|	the heavens wide vessel is your own on the floods shore your chariot waits.
धिया युयुज्र इन्दवः|	drops with the hymn have been prepared.
दिवस कण्वास इन्दवो वसु सिन्धूनां पदे|	kaṇvas the drops are in the heaven the wealth is at the waters place.
सवं वव्रिं कुह धित्सथः|	where will ye manifest your form.
अभूदु भा उ अंशवे हिरण्यं परति सूर्यः|	light came to lighten up the branch the sun appeared as it were gold.
वयख्यज्जिह्वयासितः|	and with its tongue shone forth the dark.
अभूदु पारमेतवे पन्था रतय्स साधुया|	the path of sacrifice was made to travel to the farther goal.
अदर्शि वि सरुतिर्दिवः|	the road of heaven was manifest.
तततदिदश्विनोरवो जरिता परति भूषति|	the singer of their praise awaits whatever grace the aśvins give.
मदे सोमस्यपिप्रतोः|	who save when soma gladdens them.
वावसाना विवस्वति सोमस्य पीत्या गिरा|	ye dwellers with vivasvān come auspicious as to manu erst.
मनुष्वच्छम्भूा गतम|	come to the soma and our praise.
युवोरुषा अनु शरियं परिज्मनोरुपाचरत|	o circumambient aśvins dawn follows the brightness of your way.
रता वनथो अक्तुभिः|	approve with beams our solemn rites.
उभा पिबतमश्विनोभा नः शर्म यछतम|	drink ye of our libations grant protection o ye aśvins twain.
अविद्रियाभिरूतिभिः|	with aids which none may interrupt.
तवं सोम पर चिकितो मनीषा तवं रजिष्ठमनु नेषि पन्थाम|	thou soma art preeminent for wisdom along the straightest path thou art our leader.
तव परणीती पितरो न इन्दो देवेषु रत्नमभजन्त धीराः|	our wise forefathers by thy guidance indu dealt out among the gods their share of treasure.
तवं सोम करतुभिः सुभूस्त्वं दक्षैः सुदक्षो विश्ववेदाः|	thou by thine insight art most wise o soma strong by thine energies and all possessing.
तवं वर्षा वर्षत्वेभिर्महित्वा दयुम्नेभिर्द्युम्न्यभवो नर्चक्षाः|	mighty art thou by all thy powers and greatness by glories art thou glorious guide of mortals.
राज्ञो नु ते वरुणस्य वरतानि बर्हद गभीरं तव सोम धाम|	thine are king varuṇas eternal statutes lofty and deep o soma is thy glory.
शुचिष टवमसि परियो न मित्रो दक्षाय्यो अर्यमेवासिसोम|	allpure art thou like mitra the beloved adorable like aryaman o soma.
या ते धामानि दिवि या पर्थिव्यां या पर्वतेष्वोषधीष्वप्सु|	with all thy glories on the earth in heaven on mountains in the plants and in the waters.
तेभिर्नो विश्वैः सुमना अहेळन राजन सोम परतिहव्या गर्भाय|	with all of these wellpleased and not in anger accept o royal soma our oblations.
तवं सोमासि सत्पतिस्त्वं राजोत वर्त्रहा|	thou soma art the lord of heroes king yea vṛtraslayer thou.
तवं भद्रो असि करतुः|	thou art auspicious energy.
तवं च सोम नो वशो जीवातुं न मरामहे|	and soma let it be thy wish that we may live and may not die.
परियस्तोत्रो वनस्पतिः|	praiseloving lord of plants art thou.
तवं सोम महे भगं तवं यून रतायते|	to him who keeps the law both old and young thou givest happiness.
दक्षं दधासि जीवसे|	and energy that he may live.
तवं नः सोम विश्वतो रक्षा राजन्नघायतः|	guard us king soma on all sides from him who threatens us never let.
न रिष्येत्त्वावतः सखा|	the friend of one like thee be harmed.
सोम यास्ते मयोभुव ऊतयः सन्ति दाशुषे|	with those delightful aids which thou hast soma for the worshipper.
ताभिर्नोअविता भव|	even with those protect thou us.
इमं यज्ञमिदं वचो जुजुषाण उपागहि|	accepting this our sacrifice and this our praise o soma come.
सोम तवं नोव्र्धे भव|	and be thou nigh to prosper us.
सोम गीर्भिष टवा वयं वर्धयामो वचोविदः|	wellskilled in speech we magnify thee soma with our sacred songs.
सुम्र्ळीकोन आ विश|	come thou to us most gracious one.
गयस्फानो अमीवहा वसुवित पुष्टिवर्धनः|	enricher healer of disease wealthfinder prospering our store.
सुमित्रः सोमनो भव|	be soma a good friend to us.
सोम रारन्धि नो हर्दि गावो न यवसेष्वा|	soma be happy in our heart as milchkine in the grassy meads.
मर्य इव सवोक्ये|	as a young man in his own house.
यः सोम सख्ये तव रारणद देव मर्त्यः|	o soma god the mortal man who in thy friendship hath delight.
तं दक्षः सचते कविः|	him doth the mighty sage befriend.
उरुष्या णो अभिशस्तेः सोम नि पाह्यंहसः|	save us from slanderous reproach keep us o soma from distress.
सखा सुशेव एधि नः|	be unto us a gracious friend.
आ पयायस्व समेतु ते विश्वतः सोम वर्ष्ण्यम|	soma wax great from every side may vigorous powers unite in thee.
भवा वाजस्य संगथे|	be in the gatheringplace of strength.
आ पयायस्व मदिन्तम सोम विश्वेभिरंशुभिः|	wax o most gladdening soma great through all thy rays of light and be.
भवा नःसुश्रवस्तमः सखा वर्धे|	a friend of most illustrious fame to prosper us.
सं ते पयांसि समु यन्तु वाजाः सं वर्ष्ण्यान्यभिमातिषाहः|	in thee be juicy nutriments united and powers and mighty foesubduing vigour.
आप्यायमानो अम्र्ताय सोम दिवि शरवांस्युत्तमानि धिष्व|	waxing to immortality o soma win highest glories for thyself in heaven.
या ते धामानि हविषा यजन्ति ता ते विश्वा परिभूरस्तुयज्ञम|	such of thy glories as with poured oblations men honour may they all invest our worship.
गयस्फानः परतरणः सुवीरोअवीरहा पर चरा सोम दुर्यान|	wealthgiver furtherer with troops of heroes sparing the brave come soma to our houses.
सोमो धेनुं सोमो अर्वन्तमाशुं सोमो वीरं कर्मण्यं ददाति|	to him who worships soma gives the milchcow a fleet steed and a man of active knowledge.
सादन्यं विदथ्यं सभेयं पित्र्श्रवणं यो ददाशदस्मै|	skilled in home duties meet for holy synod for council meet a glory to his father.
अषाळ्हं युत्सु पर्तनासु पप्रिं सवर्षामप्सां वर्जनस्यगोपाम|	invincible in fight saver in battles guard of our camp winner of light and water.
भरेषुजां सुक्षितिं सुश्रवसं जयन्तं तवामनु मदेम सोम|	born amid hymns wellhoused exceeding famous victor in thee will we rejoice o soma.
तवमिमा ओषधीः सोम विश्वास्त्वमपो अजनयस्त्वं गाः|	these herbs these milchkine and these running waters all these o soma thou hast generated.
तवमा ततन्थोर्वन्तरिक्षं तवं जयोतिषा वि तमो ववर्थ|	the spacious firmament hast thou expanded and with the light thou hast dispelled the darkness.
देवेन नो मनसा देव सोम रायो भागं सहसावन्नभि युध्य|	do thou god soma with thy godlike spirit victorious win for us a share of riches.
मा तवा तनदीशिषे वीर्यस्योभयेभ्यः पर चिकित्सा गविष्टौ|	let none prevent thee thou art lord of valour provide for both sides in the fray for booty.
पुरु तव दाश्वान वोचेअरिरग्ने तव सविदा|	agni thy faithful servant i call upon thee with many a gift.
तोदस्येव शरण आ महस्य|	as in the keeping of the great inciting god.
वयनिनस्य धनिनः परहोषे चिदररुषः|	thou who neer movest thee to aid the indolent the godless man.
कदा चन परजिगतो अदेवयोः|	him who though wealthy never brings an offering.
स चन्द्रो विप्र मर्त्यो महो वराधन्तमो दिवि|	splendid o singer is that man mightiest of the great in heaven.
परपरेत ते अग्ने वनुषः सयाम|	agni may we be foremost we thy worshippers.
अयं वां मधुमत्तमः सुतः सोम रताव्र्धा|	aŚvins for you who strengthen law this sweetest soma hath been shed.
तमश्विना पिबतं तिरोह्न्यं धत्तं रत्नानि दाशुशे|	drink this expressed ere yesterday and give riches to him who offers it.
तरिवन्धुरेण तरिव्र्ता सुपेशसा रथेना यातमश्विना|	come o ye aśvins mounted on your triple car threeseated beautiful of form.
कण्वासो वां बरह्म कर्ण्वन्त्यध्वरे तेषां सु शर्णुतं हवम|	to you at sacrifice the kaṇvas send the prayer graciously listen to their call.
अश्विना मधुमत्तमं पातं सोमं रताव्र्धा|	o aśvins ye who strengthen law drink ye this sweetest soma juice.
अथाद्य दस्रा वसु बिभ्रता रथे दाश्वांसमुप गछतम|	borne on your wealthfraught car come ye this day to him who offers ye of wondrous deeds.
तरिषधस्थे बर्हिषि विश्ववेदसा मध्वा यज्ञं मिमिक्षतम|	omniscient aśvins on the thriceheaped grass bedew with the sweet juice the sacrifice.
कण्वासो वां सुतसोमा अभिद्यवो युवां हवन्ते अश्विना|	the sons of kaṇva striving heavenward call on you with draughts of soma juice outpoured.
याभिः कण्वमभिष्टिभिः परावतं युवमश्विना|	o aśvins with those aids wherewith ye guarded kaṇva carefully.
ताभिः षवस्मानवतं शुभस पती पातं सोमं रताव्र्धा|	keep us o lords of splendour drink the soma juice ye strengtheners of holy law.
सुदासे दस्रा वसु बिभ्रता रथे पर्क्षो वहतमश्विना|	o mighty ones ye gave sudās abundant food brought on your treasureladen car.
रयिं समुद्रादुत वा दिवस पर्यस्मे धत्तं पुरुस्प्र्हम|	so now vouchsafe to us the wealth which many crave either from heaven or from the sea.
यन नासत्या परावति यद वा सथो अधि तुर्वशे|	nāsatyas whether ye be far away or close to turvaśa.
अतो रथेन सुव्र्ता न आ गतं साकं सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिः|	borne on your lightlyrolling chariot come to us together with the sunbeams come.
अर्वाञ्चा वां सप्तयोअध्वरश्रियो वहन्तु सवनेदुप|	so let your coursers ornaments of sacrifice bring you to our libations here.
इषं पर्ञ्चन्ता सुक्र्ते सुदानव आ बर्हिः सीदतं नरा|	bestowing food on him who acts and gives aright sit chiefs upon the sacred grass.
तेन नासत्या गतं रथेन सूर्यत्वचा|	come o nāsatyas on your car decked with a sunbright canopy.
येन शश्वदूहथुर्दाशुषे वसु मध्वः सोमस्य पीतये|	whereon ye ever bring wealth to the worshipper to drink the somas pleasant juice.
उक्थेभिरर्वागवसे पुरूवसू अर्कैश्च नि हवयामहे|	with lauds and songs of praise we call them down to us that they most rich may succour us.
शश्वत कण्वानां सदसि परिये हि कं सोमं पपथुरश्विना|	for ye have ever in the kaṇvas wellloved house o aśvins drunk the soma juice.
पर वः पान्तमन्धसो धियायते महे शूराय विष्णवे चार्चत|	to the great hero him who sets his mind thereon and viṣṇu praise aloud in song your draught of juice.
या सानुनि पर्वतानामदाभ्या महस्तस्थतुरर्वतेव साधुना|	gods neer beguiled who borne as twere by noble steed have stood upon the lofty ridges of the hills.
तवेषमित्था समरणं शिमीवतोरिन्द्राविष्णू सुतपा वामुरुष्यति|	your somadrinker keeps afar your furious rush indra and viṣṇu when ye come with all your might.
या मर्त्याय परतिधीयमानमित कर्शानोरस्तुरसनामुरुष्यथः|	that which hath been directed well at mortal man bowarmed kṛśānus arrow ye turn far aside.
ता ईं वर्धन्ति मह्यस्य पौंस्यं नि मातरा नयति रेतसे भुजे|	these offerings increase his mighty manly strength he brings both parents down to share the genial flow.
दधाति पुत्रोअवरं परं पितुर्नाम तर्तीयमधि रोचने दिवः|	he lowers though a son the fathers highest name the third is that which is high in the light of heaven.
तततदिदस्य पौंस्यं गर्णीमसीनस्य तरतुरव्र्कस्य मीळ्हुषः|	we laud this manly power of him the mighty one preserver inoffensive bounteous and benign.
यः पार्थिवानि तरिभिरिद विगामभिरुरु करमिष्टोरुगायाय जीवसे|	his who strode widely pacing with three steppings forth over the realms of earth for freedom and for life.
दवे इदस्य करमणे सवर्द्र्शोअभिख्याय मर्त्यो भुरण्यति|	a mortal man when he beholds two steps of him who looks upon the light is restless with amaze.
तर्तीयमस्य नकिरा दधर्षति वयश्चन पतयन्तः पतत्रिणः|	but his third step doth no one venture to approach no nor the feathered birds of air who fly with wings.
चतुर्भिः साकं नवतिं च नामभिश्चक्रं न वर्त्तं वयतीन्रवीविपत|	he like a rounded wheel hath in swift motion set his ninety racing steeds together with the four.
बर्हच्छरीरो विमिमान रक्वभिर्युवाकुमारः परत्येत्याहवम|	developed vast in form with those who sing forth praise a youth no more a child he cometh to our call.
का राधद धोत्राश्विना वां को वां जोष उभयोः|	aŚvins what praise may win your grace who may be pleasing to you both.
कथा विधात्यप्रचेताः|	how shall the ignorant worship you.
विद्वांसाविद दुरः पर्छेदविद्वानित्थापरो अचेताः|	here let the ignorant ask the means of you who knowfor none beside you knoweth aught.
नू चिन नु मर्ते अक्रौ|	not of a spiritless mortal man.
ता विद्वांसा हवामहे वां ता नो विद्वांसा मन्म वोचेतमद्य|	such as ye are allwise we call you ye wise declare to us this day accepted prayer.
परार्चद दयमानो युवाकुः|	loving you well your servant lauds you.
वि पर्छामि पाक्या न देवान वषट्क्र्तस्याद्भुतस्य दस्रा|	simply ye mighty ones i ask the gods of that wondrous oblation hallowed by the mystic word.
पातं च सह्यसो युवं च रभ्यसो नः|	save us from what is stronger fiercer than ourselves.
पर या घोषे भर्गवाणे न शोभे यया वाचा यजति पज्रियो वाम|	forth go the hymn that shone in ghoṣā bhṛgus like the song wherewith the son of pajra worships you.
परैषयुर्न विद्वान|	like some wise minister.
शरुतं गायत्रं तकवानस्याहं चिद धि रिरेभाश्विना वाम|	hear ye the song of him who hastens speedily o aśvins i am he who sang your praise.
आक्षी शुभस पती दन|	hither ye lords of splendour hither turn your eyes.
युवं हयास्तं महो रन युवं वा यन निरततंसतम|	for ye were ever nigh to deal forth ample wealth to give the wealth that ye had gathered up.
तानो वसू सुगोपा सयातं पातं नो वर्कादघायोः|	as such ye vasus guard us well and keep us safely from the wicked wolf.
मा कस्मै धातमभ्यमित्रिणे नो माकुत्रा नो गर्हेभ्यो धेनवो गुः|	give us not up to any man who hateth us nor let our milchcows stray whose udders give us food.
सतनाभुजो अशिश्वीः|	far from our homes without their calves.
दुहीयन मित्रधितये युवाकु राये च नो मिमीतं वाजवत्यै|	may they who love you gain you for their friends prepare ye us for opulence with strengthening food.
इषे च नो मिमीतं धेनुमत्यै|	prepare us for the food that floweth from our cows.
अश्विनोरसनं रथमनश्वं वाजिनावतोः|	i have obtained the horseless car of aśvins rich in sacrifice.
तेनाहं भूरि चाकन|	and i am well content therewith.
अयं समह मा तनूह्याते जनाननु|	may it convey me evermore may the light chariot pass from men.
सोमपेयं सुखो रथः|	to men unto the soma draught.
अध सवप्नस्य निर्विदेअभुञ्जतश्च रेवतः|	it holdeth slumber in contempt and the rich who enjoyeth not.
उभा ता बस्रि नश्यतः|	both vanish quickly and are lost.
वसू रुद्रा पुरुमन्तू वर्धन्ता दशस्यतं नो वर्षणावभिष्टौ|	ye vasus twain ye rudras full of counsel grant us strong strengtheners when ye stand beside us.
दस्रा ह यद रेक्ण औचथ्यो वां पर यत सस्राथेकवाभिरूती|	what wealth aucathya craves of you great helpers when ye come forward with no niggard succour.
को वां दाशत सुमतये चिदस्यै वसू यद धेथे नमसा पदे गोः|	who may give you aught vasus for your favour for what at the cows place ye grant through worship.
जिग्र्तमस्मे रेवतीः पुरन्धीः कामप्रेणेव मनसा चरन्ता|	wake for us understanding full of riches come with a heart that will fulfil our longing.
युक्तो ह यद वां तौग्र्याय पेरुर्वि मध्ये अर्णसो धायि पज्रः|	as erst for tugras son your car seacrossing strong was equipped and set amid the waters.
उप वामवः शरणं गमेयं शूरो नाज्म पतयद्भिरेवैः|	so may i gain your shelter and protection as with winged course a hero seeks his army.
उपस्तुतिरौचथ्यमुरुष्येन मा मामिमे पतत्रिणी वि दुग्धाम|	may this my praise preserve ucathyas offspring let not these twain who fly with wings exhaust me.
मा मामेधो दशतयश्चितो धाक पर यद वां बद्धस्त्मनि खादति कषाम|	let not the wood ten times uppiled consume me when fixed for you it bites the ground it stands on.
न मा गरन नद्यो मात्र्तमा दासा यदीं सुसमुब्धमवाधुः|	the most maternal streams wherein the dāsas cast me securely bound have not devoured me.
शिरो यदस्य तरैतनो वितक्षत सवयं दास उरो अंसावपि गध|	when traitana would cleave my head asunder the dāsa wounded his own breast and shoulders.
दीर्घतमा मामतेयो जुजुर्वान दशमे युगे|	dīrghatamas the son of mamatā hath come to length of days in the tenth age of human kind.
अपामर्थं यतीनां बरह्मा भवति सारथिः|	he is the brahman of the waters as they strive to reach their end and aim their charioteer is he.
वनेम पूर्वीरर्यो मनीषा अग्निः सुशोको विश्वान्यश्याः|	may we the pious win much food by prayer may agni with fair light pervade each act.
आ दैव्यानि वरता चिकित्वाना मानुषस्य जनस्य जन्म|	he the observer of the heavenly laws of gods and of the race of mortal man.
गर्भो यो अपां गर्भो वनानां गर्भश्च सथातां गर्भश्चरथाम|	he who is germ of waters germ of woods germ of all things that move not and that move.
अद्रौ चिदस्मा अन्तर्दुरोणे विशां न विश्वो अम्र्तः सवाधीः|	to him even in the rock and in the house immortal one he cares for all mankind.
स हि कषपावानग्नी रयीणां दाशद यो अस्मा अरं सूक्तैः|	agni is lord of riches for the man who serves him readily with sacred songs.
एता चिकित्वो भूमा नि पाहि देवानां जन्म मर्तांश्च विद्वान|	protect these beings thou with careful thought knowing the races both of gods and men.
वर्धान यं पूर्वीः कषपो विरूपा सथातुश्च रथं रतप्रवीतम|	whom many dawns and nights unlike make strong whom born in law all things that move and stand.
अराधि होता सवर्निषत्तः कर्ण्वन विश्वान्यपांसि सत्या|	he hath been won herald who sits in light making effectual all our holy works.
गोषु परशस्तिं वनेषु धिषे भरन्त विश्वे बलिं सवर्णः|	thou settest value on our cows and woods all shall bring tribute to us to the light.
वि तवा नरः पुरुत्रा सपर्यन पितुर्न जिव्रेर्वि वेदोभरन्त|	men have served thee in many and sundry spots parting as twere an aged fathers wealth.
साधुर्न गर्ध्नुरस्तेव शूरो यातेव भीमस्त्वेषः समत्सु|	like a brave archer like one skilled and bold a fierce avenger so he shines in fight.
उभे पुनामि रोदसी रतेन दरुहो दहामि सं महीरनिन्द्राः|	with sacrifice i purge both earth and heaven i burn up great shefiends who serve not indra.
अभिव्लग्य यत्र हता अमित्रा वैलस्थानं परि तर्ळ्हा अशेरन|	where throttled by thy hand the foes were slaughtered and in the pit of death lay pierced and mangled.
अभिव्लग्या चिदद्रिवः शीर्षा यातुमतीनाम|	o thou who castest forth the stones crushing the sorceresses heads.
छिन्धि वटूरिणा पदा महावटूरिणा पदा|	break them with thy widespreading foot with thy widespreading mighty foot.
अवासां मघवञ जहि शर्धो यातुमतीनाम|	do thou o maghavan beat off these sorceresses daring strength.
वैलस्थानके अर्मके महावैलस्थे अर्मके|	cast them within the narrow pit within the deep and narrow pit.
यासां तिस्रः पञ्चाशतोअभिव्लङगैरपावपः|	of whom thou hast ere now destroyed thricefifty with thy fierce attacks.
तत सुते मनायति तकत सु ते मनायति|	that deed they count a glorious deed though small to thee a glorious deed.
पिशङगभ्र्ष्टिमम्भ्र्णं पिशाचिमिन्द्र सं मर्ण|	o indra crush and bray to bits the fearful fieryweaponed fiend.
सर्वंरक्षो नि बर्हय|	strike every demon to the ground.
अवर्मह इन्द्र दाद्र्हि शरुधी नः शुशोच हि दयौः कषान भीषानद्रिवो घर्णान न भीषानद्रिवः|	tear down the mighty ones o indra hear thou us for heaven hath glowed like earth in fear o thunderarmed as dreading fierce heat thunderarmed.
शुष्मिन्तमो हि शुष्मिभिर्वधैरुग्रेभिरीयसे|	most mighty mid the mighty ones thou speedest with strong bolts of death.
अपूरुषघ्नो अप्रतीत शूर सत्वभिस्त्रिसप्तैः शूर सत्वभिः|	not slaying men unconquered hero with the brave o hero with the thriceseven brave.
वनोति हि सुन्वन कषयं परीणसः सुन्वानो हि षमा यजत्यव दविषो देवानामव दविषः|	the pourer of libations gains the home of wealth pouring his gift conciliates hostilities yea the hostilities of gods.
सुन्वान इत सिषासति सहस्रा वाज्यव्र्तः|	pouring he strives unchecked and strong to win him riches thousandfold.
सुन्वानायेन्द्रो ददात्याभुवं रयिं ददात्याभुवम|	indra gives lasting wealth to him who pours forth gifts yea wealth he gives that long shall last.
उपो षु शर्णुही गिरो मघवन मातथा इव|	graciously listen to our songs maghavan be not negligent.
यदा नः सून्र्तावतः कर आदर्थयास इद योजा नविन्द्र ते हरी|	as thou hast made us full of joy and lettest us solicit thee now indra yoke thy two bay steeds.
अक्षन्नमीमदन्त हयव परिया अधूषत|	well have they eaten and rejoiced the friends have risen and passed away.
अस्तोषत सवभानवो विप्रा नविष्ठया मती योजा|	the sages luminous in themselves have praised thee with their latest hymn now indra yoke thy two bay steeds.
सुसन्द्र्शं तवा वयं मघवन वन्दिषीमहि|	maghavan we will reverence thee who art so fair to look upon.
पर नूनं पूर्णवन्धुर सतुतो याहि वशाननु योजा|	thus praised according to our wish come now with richly laden car now indra yoke thy two bay steeds.
स घा तं वर्षणं रथमधि तिष्ठाति गोविदम|	he will in very truth ascend the powerful car that finds the kine.
यःपात्रं हारियोजनं पूर्णमिन्द्र चिकेतति योजा|	who thinks upon the wellfilled bowl the tawny coursers harnesser now indra yoke thy two bay steeds.
युक्तस्ते अस्तु दक्षिण उत सव्यः शतक्रतो|	let lord of hundred powers thy steeds be harnessed on the right and left.
तेन जायामुप परियां मन्दानो याह्यन्धसो योजा|	therewith in rapture of the juice draw near to thy beloved spouse now indra yoke thy two bay steeds.
युनज्मि ते बरह्मणा केशिना हरी उप पर याहि दधिषे गभस्त्योः|	with holy prayer i yoke thy longmaned pair of bays come hitherward thou holdest them in both thy hands.
उत तवा सुतासो रभसा अमन्दिषुः पूषण्वान वज्रिन समु पत्न्यामदः|	the stirring draughts of juice outpoured have made thee glad thou thunderer hast rejoiced with pūṣan and thy spouse.
तवमग्ने वसून्रिह रुद्रानादित्यानुत|	worship the vasus agni here the rudras the Ādityas all.
यजा सवध्वरं जनं मनुजातं घर्तप्रुषम|	who spring from manu those who know fair rites who pour their blessings down.
शरुष्टीवानो हि दाशुषे देवा अग्ने विचेतसः|	agni the gods who understand give ear unto the worshipper.
तान रोहिदश्व गिर्वणस्त्रयस्त्रिंशतमा वह|	lord of red steeds who lovest song bring thou those threeandthirty gods.
परियमेधवदत्रिवज्जातवेदो विरूपवत|	o jātavedas great in act hearken thou to praskaṇvas call.
अङगिरस्वन महिव्रत परस्कण्वस्य शरुधी हवम|	as priyamedha erst was heard atri virūpa aṅgiras.
महिकेरव ऊतये परियमेधा अहूषत|	the sons of priyamedha skilled in lofty praise have called for help.
राजन्तमध्वराणामग्निं शुक्रेण शोचिषा|	on agni who with fulgent flame is ruler of all holy rites.
घर्ताहवन सन्त्येमा उ षु शरुधी गिरः|	hear thou invoked with holy oil bountiful giver of rewards.
याभिः कण्वस्य सूनवो हवन्तेअवसे तवा|	these eulogies whereby the sons of kaṇva call thee to their aid.
तवां चित्रश्रवस्तम हवन्ते विक्षु जन्तवः|	o agni loved by many thou of fame most wondrous in their homes.
शोचिष्केशम्पुरुप्रियाग्ने हव्याय वोळ्हवे|	men call on thee whose hair is flame to be the bearer of their gifts.
नि तवा होतारं रत्विजं दधिरे वसुवित्तमम|	thee agni best to find out wealth most widely famous quick to hear.
शरुत्कर्णं सप्रथस्तमं विप्रा अग्ने दिविष्टिषु|	singers have stablished in their rites herald and ministering priest.
आ तवा विप्रा अचुच्यवुः सुतसोमा अभि परयः|	singers with soma pressed have made thee agni hasten to the feast.
बर्हद भा बिभ्रतो हविरग्ने मर्ताय दाशुषे|	great light to mortal worshipper what time they bring the sacred gift.
परातर्याव्णः सहस्क्र्त सोमपेयाय सन्त्य|	good bounteous son of strength this day seat here on sacred grass the gods.
इहाद्य दैव्यंजनं बर्हिरा सादया वसो|	who come at early morn the host of heaven to drink the soma juice.
अर्वाञ्चं दैव्यं जनमग्ने यक्ष्व सहूतिभिः|	bring with joint invocations thou o agni the celestial host.
अयं सोमः सुदानवस्तं पात तिरोह्न्यम|	here stands the soma bounteous gods drink this expressed ere yesterday.
आ विद्युन्मद्भिर्मरुतः सवर्कै रथेभिर्यात रष्टिमद्भिरश्वपर्णैः|	come hither maruts on your lightning laden cars sounding with sweet songs armed with lances winged with steeds.
आ वर्षिष्ठया न इषा वयो न पप्तता सुमायाः|	fly unto us with noblest food like birds o ye of mighty power.
तेअरुणेभिर्वरमा पिशङगैः शुभे कं यान्ति रथतूर्भिरश्वैः|	with their redhued or haply tawny coursers which speed their chariots on they come for glory.
रुक्मो न चित्रः सवधितीवान पव्या रथस्य जङघनन्त भूम|	brilliant like gold is he who holds the thunder earth have they smitten with the chariots felly.
शरिये कं वो अधि तनूषु वाशीर्मेधा वना न कर्णवन्त ऊर्ध्वा|	for beauty ye have swords upon your bodies as they stir woods so may they stir our spirits.
युष्मभ्यं कं मरुतः सुजातास्तुविद्युम्नासो धनयन्ते अद्रिम|	for your sake o ye maruts very mighty and wellborn have they set the stone in motion.
अहानि गर्ध्राः पर्या व आगुरिमां धियं वार्कार्यांच देवीम|	the days went round you and came back o yearners back to this prayer and to this solemn worship.
बरह्म कर्ण्वन्तो गोतमासो अर्कैरूर्ध्वं नुनुद्रौत्सधिं पिबध्यै|	the gotamas making their prayer with singing have pushed the wells lid up to drink the water.
एतत तयन न योजनमचेति सस्वर्ह यन मरुतो गोतमो वः|	no hymn way ever known like this aforetime which gotama sang forth for you o maruts.
पश्यन हिरण्यचक्रानयोदंष्ट्रान विधावतो वराहून|	what time upon your golden wheels he saw you wild boars rushing about with tusks of iron.
एषा सया वो मरुतोअनुभर्त्री परति षटोभति वाघतो न वाणी|	to you this freshening draught of soma rusheth o maruts like the voice of one who prayeth.
अस्तोभयद वर्थासामनु सवधां गभस्त्योः|	it rusheth freely from our hands as these libations wont to flow.
मा नो अस्मिन मघवन पर्त्स्वंहसि नहि ते अन्तः शवसः परीणशे|	urge us not maghavan to this distressful fight for none may comprehend the limit of thy strength.
अक्रन्दयो नद्यो रोरुवद वना कथा न कषोणीर्भियसा समारत|	thou with fierce shout hast made the woods and rivers roar did not men run in crowds together in their fear.
अर्चा शक्राय शाकिने शचीवते शर्ण्वन्तमिन्द्रं महयन्नभि षटुहि|	sing hymns of praise to Śakra lord of power and might laud thou and magnify indra who heareth thee.
यो धर्ष्णुना शवसा रोदसी उभे वर्षा वर्षत्वा वर्षभो नय्र्ञ्जते|	who with his daring might a bull exceeding strong in strength maketh him master of the heaven and earth.
अर्चा दिवे बर्हते शूष्यं वचः सवक्षत्रं यस्य धर्षतो धर्षन मनः|	sing forth to lofty dyaus a strengthbestowing song the bold whose resolute mind hath independent sway.
बर्हच्छ्रवा असुरो बर्हणा कर्तः पुरो हरिभ्यां वर्षभो रथो हि षः|	high glory hath the asura compact of strength drawn on by two bay steeds a bull a car is he.
तवं दिवो बर्हतः सानु कोपयोअव तमना धर्षता शम्बरं भिनत|	the ridges of the lofty heaven thou madest shake thou daring of thyself smotest through Śambara.
यन मायिनो वरन्दिनो मन्दिना धर्षच्छितां गभस्तिमशनिं पर्तन्यसि|	when bold with gladdening juice thou warredst with thy bolt sharp and twoedged against the banded sorcerers.
नि यद वर्णक्षि शवसनस्य मूर्धनि शुष्णस्य चिद वरन्दिनोरोरुवद वना|	when with a roar that fills the woods thou forcest down on winds head the stores which Śuṣṇa kept confined.
पराचीनेन मनसा बर्हणावता यदद्या चित कर्णवः कस्त्वा परि|	who shall have power to stay thee firm and eagersouled from doing still this day what thou of old hast done.
तवमाविथ नर्यं तुर्वशं यदुं तवं तुर्वीतिं वय्यंशतक्रतो|	thou helpest narya turvaśa and yadu and vayyas son turvīti Śatakratu.
तवं रथमेतशं कर्त्व्ये धने तवं पुरो नवतिं दम्भयो नव|	thou helpest horse and car in final battle thou breakest down the nineandninety castles.
स घा राजा सत्पतिः शूशुवज्जनो रातहव्यः परति यः शासमिन्वति|	a herolord is he king of a mighty folk who offers free oblations and promotes the law.
उक्था वा यो अभिग्र्णाति राधसा दानुरस्मा उपरा पिन्वते दिवः|	who with a bounteous guerdon welcomes hymns of praise for him flows down the abundant stream below the sky.
असमं कषत्रमसमा मनीषा पर सोमपा अपसा सन्तु नेमे|	his power is matchless matchless is his wisdom chief through their work be some who drink the soma.
ये त इन्द्र ददुषो वर्धयन्ति महि कषत्रं सथविरं वर्ष्ण्यं च|	those indra who increase the lordly power the firm heroic strength of thee the giver.
तुभ्येदेते बहुला अद्रिदुग्धाश्चमूषदश्चमसा इन्द्रपानाः|	therefore for thee are these abundant beakers indras drink stonepressed juices held in ladles.
वयश्नुहि तर्पया काममेषामथा मनो वसुदेयाय कर्ष्व|	quaff them and satisfy therewith thy longing then fix thy mind upon bestowing treasure.
अपामतिष्ठद धरुणह्वरं तमोअन्तर्व्र्त्रस्य जठरेषुपर्वतः|	there darkness stood the vault that stayed the waters flow in vṛtras hollow side the raincloud lay concealed.
अभीमिन्द्रो नद्यो वव्रिणा हिता विश्वा अनुष्ठाः परवणेषु जिघ्नते|	but indra smote the rivers which the obstructer stayed flood following after flood down steep declivities.
स शेव्र्धमधि धा दयुम्नमस्मे महि कषत्रं जनाषाळिन्द्र तव्यम|	so give us indra blissincreasing glory give us great sway and strength that conquers people.
रक्षा च नो मघोनः पाहि सूरीन राये च नः सवपत्या इषे धाः|	preserve our wealthy patrons save our princes vouchsafe us wealth and food with noble offspring.
पर मन्दिने पितुमदर्चता वचो यः कर्ष्णगर्भा निरहन्न्र्जिश्वना|	sing with oblation praise to him who maketh glad who with Ṛjiśvan drove the dusky brood away.
अवस्यवो वर्षणं वज्रदक्षिणं मरुत्वन्तं सख्याय हवामहे|	fain for help him the strong whose right hand wields the bolt him girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
यो वयंसं जाह्र्षाणेन मन्युना यः शम्बरं यो अहन पिप्रुमव्रतम|	indra who with triumphant wrath smote vyaṁsa down and Śambara and pipru the unrighteous one.
इन्द्रो यः शुष्णमशुषं नयाव्र्णं म|	who extirpated Śuṣṇa the insatiatehim girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
यस्य दयावाप्र्थिवी पौंस्यं महद यस्य वरते वरुणो यस्य सूर्यः|	he whose great work of manly might is heaven and earth and varuṇa and sūrya keep his holy law.
यस्येन्द्रस्य सिन्धवः सश्चति वरतं म|	indra whose law the rivers follow as they flowhim girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
यो अश्वानां यो गवां गोपतिर्वशी य आरितः कर्मणि कर्मणि सथिरः|	he who is lord and master of the steeds and kine honouredthe firm and sureat every holy act.
वीळोश्चिदिन्द्रो यो असुन्वतो वधो म|	stayer even of the strong who pours no offering outhim girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
यो विश्वस्य जगतः पराणतस पतिर्यो बरह्मणे परथमो गा अविन्दत|	he who is lord of all the world that moves and breathes who for the brahman first before all found the cows.
इन्द्रो यो दस्यून्रधरानवातिरन म|	indra who cast the dasyus down beneath his feethim girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
यः शूरेभिर्हव्यो यश्च भीरुभिर्यो धावद्भिर्हूयते यश्च जिग्युभिः|	whom cowards must invoke and valiant men of war invoked by those who conquer and by those who flee.
इन्द्रं यं विश्वा भुवनाभि सन्दधुर्म|	indra to whom all beings turn their constant thoughthim girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
रुद्राणामेति परदिशा विचक्षणो रुद्रेभिर्योषा तनुते पर्थु जरयः|	refulgent in the rudras region he proceeds and with the rudras through the wide space speeds the dame.
इन्द्रं मनीषा अभ्यर्चति शरुतं म|	the hymn of praise extols indra the farrenowned him girt by maruts we invoke to be our friend.
यद वा मरुत्वः परमे सधस्थे यद वावमे वर्जने मादयासे|	o girt by maruts whether thou delight thee in loftiest gatheringplace or lowly dwelling.
अत आ याह्यध्वरं नो अछा तवाया हविश्चक्र्मा सत्यराधः|	come thence unto our rite true boonbestower through love of thee have we prepared oblations.
तवायेन्द्र सोमं सुषुमा सुदक्ष तवाया हविश्चक्र्मा बरह्मवाहः|	we fain for thee strong indra have pressed soma and o thou sought with prayer have made oblations.
अधा नियुत्वः सगणो मरुद्भिरस्मिन यज्ञे बर्हिषिमादयस्व|	now at this sacrifice with all thy maruts on sacred grass o teamborne god rejoice thee.
मादयस्व हरिभिर्ये त इन्द्र वि षयस्व शिप्रे वि सर्जस्व धेने|	rejoice thee with thine own bay steeds o indra unclose thy jaws and let thy lips be open.
आ तवा सुशिप्र हरयो वहन्तूशन हव्यानि परति नो जुषस्व|	thou with the fair cheek let thy bay steeds bring thee gracious to us he pleased with our oblation.
मरुत्स्तोत्रस्य वर्जनस्य गोपा वयमिन्द्रेण सनुयाम वाजम|	guards of the camp whose praisers are the maruts may we through indra get ourselves the booty.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
अस्य वामस्य पलितस्य होतुस्तस्य भराता मध्यमो अस्त्यश्नः|	of this benignant priest with eld greycoloured the brother midmost of the three is lightning.
तर्तीयो भराता घर्तप्र्ष्ठो अस्यात्रापश्यं विश्पतिं सप्तपुत्रम|	the third is he whose back with oil is sprinkled here i behold the chief with seven male children.
सप्त युञ्जन्ति रथमेकचक्रमेको अश्वो वहति सप्तनामा|	seven to the onewheeled chariot yoke the courser bearing seven names the single courser draws it.
तरिनाभि चक्रमजरमनर्वं यत्रेमा विश्वा भुवनाधितस्थुः|	threenaved the wheel is sound and undecaying whereon are resting all these worlds of being.
इमं रथमधि ये सप्त तस्थुः सप्तचक्रं सप्त वहन्त्यश्वाः|	the seven who on the sevenwheeled car are mounted have horses seven in tale who draw them onward.
सप्त सवसारो अभि सं नवन्ते यत्र गवां निहिता सप्त नाम|	seven sisters utter songs of praise together in whom the names of the seven cows are treasured.
को ददर्श परथमं जायमानमस्थन्वन्तं यदनस्था बिभर्ति|	who hath beheld him as he sprang to being seen how the boneless one supports the bony.
भूम्या असुरस्र्गात्मा कव सवित को विद्वांसमुप गात परष्टुमेतत|	where is the blood of earth the life the spirit who may approach the man who knows to ask it.
पाकः पर्छामि मनसाविजानन देवानामेना निहिता पदानि|	unripe in mind in spirit undiscerning i ask of these the gods established places.
वत्से बष्कयेअधि सप्त तन्तून वि तत्निरे कवय ओतवाु|	for up above the yearling calf the sages to form a web their own seven threads have woven.
अचिकित्वाञ्चिकितुषश्चिदत्र कवीन पर्छामि विद्मने न विद्वान|	i ask unknowing those who know the sages as one all ignorant for sake of knowledge.
वि यस्तस्तम्भ षळ इमा रजांस्यजस्य रूपे किमपि सविदेकम|	what was that one who in the unborns image hath stablished and fixed firm these worlds six regions.
इह बरवीतु य ईमङग वेदास्य वामस्य निहितं पदं वेः|	let him who knoweth presently declare it this lovely birds securely founded station.
शीर्ष्णः कषीरं दुह्रते गावो अस्य वव्रिं वसाना उदकं पदापुः|	forth from his head the cows draw milk and wearing his vesture with their foot have drunk the water.
माता पितरं रत आ बभाज धीत्यग्रे मनसा सं हि जग्मे|	the mother gave the sire his share of order with thought at first she wedded him in spirit.
सा बीभत्सुर्गर्भरसा निविद्धा नमस्वन्त इदुपवाकमीयुः|	she the coy dame was filled with dew prolific with adoration men approached to praise her.
युक्ता मातासीद धुरि दक्षिणाया अतिष्ठद गर्भो वर्जनीष्वन्तः|	yoked was the mother to the boon cows carpole in the dank rows of cloud the infant rested.
अमीमेद वत्सो अनु गामपश्यद विश्वरूप्यं तरिषु योजनेषु|	then the calf lowed and looked upon the mother the cow who wears all shapes in three directions.
तिस्रो मातॄस्त्रीन पितॄन बिभ्रदेक ऊर्ध्वस्तस्थौ नेमव गलापयन्ति|	bearing three mothers and three fathers single he stood erect they never make him weary.
मन्त्रयन्ते दिवो अमुष्य पर्ष्ठे विश्वविदं वाचमविश्वमिन्वाम|	there on the pitch of heaven they speak together in speech allknowing but not allimpelling.
दवादशारं नहि तज्जराय वर्वर्ति चक्रं परि दयां रतस्य|	formed with twelve spokes by length of time unweakened rolls round the heaven this wheel of during order.
आ पुत्रा अग्ने मिथुनासो अत्र सप्त शतानि विंशतिश्च तस्थुः|	herein established joined in pairs together seven hundred sons and twenty stand o agni.
पञ्चपादं पितरं दवादशाक्र्तिं दिव आहुः परे अर्धे पुरीषिणम|	they call him in the farther half of heaven the sire fivefooted of twelve forms wealthy in watery store.
अथेमे अन्य उपरे विचक्षणं सप्तचक्रे षळर आहुरर्पितम|	these others say that he god with farseeing eyes is mounted on the lower sevenwheeled sixspoked car.
पञ्चारे चक्रे परिवर्तमाने तस्मिन्ना तस्थुर्भुवनानि विश्वा|	upon this fivespoked wheel revolving ever all living creatures rest and are dependent.
तस्य नाक्षस्तप्यते भूरिभारः सनादेव न शीर्यते सनाभिः|	its axle heavyladen is not heated the nave from ancient time remains unbroken.
सनेमि चक्रमजरं वि वाव्र्त उत्तानायां दश युक्ता वहन्ति|	the wheel revolves unwasting with its felly ten draw it yoked to the farstretching carpole.
सूर्यस्य चक्षू रजसैत्याव्र्तं तस्मिन्नार्पिता भुवनानि विश्वा|	the suns eye moves encompassed by the region on him dependent rest all living creatures.
साकंजानां सप्तथमहुरेकजं षळ इद यमा रषयो देवजा इति|	of the coborn they call the seventh singleborn the six twin pairs are called Ṛṣis children of gods.
तेषामिष्टानि विहितानि धामश सथात्रे रेजन्ते विक्र्तानि रूपशः|	their good gifts sought of men are ranged in order due and various in their form move for the lord who guides.
सत्रियः सतीस्तानु मे पुंस आहुः पश्यदक्षण्वान नवि चेतदन्धः|	they told me these were males though truly females he who hath eyes sees this the blind discerns not.
कविर्यः पुत्रः स ईमा चिकेत यस्ता विजानात स पितुष पितासत|	the son who is a sage hath comprehended who knows this rightly is his fathers father.
अवः परेण पर एनावरेण पदा वत्सं बिभ्रती गौरुदस्थात|	beneath the upper realm above this lower bearing her calf at foot the cow hath risen.
सा कद्रीची कं सविदर्धं परागात कव सवित सूते नहि यूथे अन्तः|	witherward to what place hath she departed where calves she not amid this herd of cattle.
अवः परेण पितरं यो अस्यानुवेद पर एनावरेण|	who that the father of this calf discerneth beneath the upper realm above the lower.
कवीयमानः क इह पर वोचद देवं मनः कुतो अधि पराजातम|	showing himself a sage may here declare it whence hath the godlike spirit had its rising.
ये अर्वाञ्चस्तानु पराच आहुर्ये पराञ्चस्तानु अर्वाच आहुः|	those that come hitherward they call departing those that depart they call directed hither.
इन्द्रश्च या चक्रथुः सोम तानि धुरा न युक्ता रजसो वहन्ति|	and what so ye have made indra and soma steeds bear as twere yoked to the regions carpole.
दवा सुपर्णा सयुजा सखाया समानं वर्क्षं परि षस्वजाते|	two birds with fair wings knit with bonds of friendship in the same sheltering tree have found a refuge.
तयोरन्यः पिप्पलं सवाद्वत्त्यनश्नन्नन्यो अभि चाकशीति|	one of the twain eats the sweet figtrees fruitage the other eating not regardeth only.
यत्रा सुपर्णा अम्र्तस्य भागमनिमेषं विदथाभिस्वरन्ति|	where those fine birds hymn ceaselessly their portion of life eternal and the sacred synods.
इनो विश्वस्य भुवनस्य गोपाः स मा धीरः पाकमत्रा विवेश|	there is the universes mighty keeper who wise hath entered into me the simple.
यस्मिन वर्क्षे मध्वदः सुपर्णा निविशन्ते सुवते चाधि विश्वे|	the tree whereon the fine birds eat the sweetness where they all rest and procreate their offspring.
तस्येदाहुः पिप्पलं सवाद्वग्रे तन नोन नशद यःपितरं न वेद|	upon its top they say the fig is luscious none gaineth it who knoweth not the father.
यद गायत्रे अधि गायत्रमाहितं तरैष्टुभाद वा तरैष्टुभं निरतक्षत|	how on the gāyatrī the gāyatrī was based how from the triṣṭup they fashioned the triṣṭup forth.
यद वा जगज्जगत्याहितं पदं य इत तद विदुस्ते अम्र्तत्वमानशुः|	how on the jagatī was based the jagatīthey who know this have won themselves immortal life.
गायत्रेण परति मिमीते अर्कमर्केण साम तरैष्टुभेन वाकम|	with gāyatrī he measures out the praisesong sāma with praisesong triplet with the triṣṭup.
वाकेन वाकं दविपदा चतुष्पदाक्षरेण मिमते सप्त वाणीः|	the triplet with the two or fourfoot measure and with the syllable they form seven metres.
जगता सिन्धुं दिव्यस्थभायद रथन्तरे सूर्यं पर्यपश्यत|	with jagatī the flood in heaven he stablished and saw the sun in the rathantara sāman.
गायत्रस्य समिधस्तिस्र आहुस्ततो मह्ना पर रिरिचे महित्वा|	gāyatrī hath they say three brands for kindling hence it excels in majesty and vigour.
उप हवये सुदुघां धेनुमेतां सुहस्तो गोधुगुत दोहदेनाम|	i invocate the milchcow good for milking so that the milker deft of hand may drain her.
शरेष्ठं सवं सविता साविषन नोअभीद्धो घर्मस्तदु षु पर वोचम|	may savitar give goodliest stimulation the caldron is made hot i will proclaim it.
हिङकर्ण्वती वसुपत्नी वसूनां वत्समिछन्ती मनसाभ्यागात|	she lady of all treasure is come hither yearning in spirit for her calf and lowing.
दुहामश्विभ्यां पयो अघ्न्येयं स वर्धतां महते सौभगाय|	may this cow yield her milk for both the aśvins and may she prosper to our high advantage.
गौरमीमेदनु वत्सं मिषन्तं मूर्धानं हिंं अक्र्णोन मातवा उ|	the cow hath lowed after her blinking youngling she licks his forehead as she lows to form it.
सर्क्वाणं घर्ममभि वावशाना मिमाति मायुं पयते पयोभिः|	his mouth she fondly calls to her warm udder and suckles him with milk while gently lowing.
अयं स शिङकते येन गौरभीव्र्ता मिमाति मायुं धवसनावधि शरिता|	he also snorts by whom encompassed round the cow laws as she clings unto the shedder of the rain.
सा चित्तिभिर्नि हि चकार मर्त्यं विद्युद भवन्ती परति वव्रिमौहत|	she with her shrilling cries hath humbled mortal man and turned to lightning hath stripped off her covering robe.
अनच्छये तुरगातु जीवमेजद धरुवं मध्य आ पस्त्यानाम|	that which hath breath and speed and life and motion lies firmly stablished in the midst of houses.
जीवो मर्तस्य चरति सवधाभिरमर्त्यो मर्त्येना सयोनिः|	living by offerings to the dead he moveth immortal one the brother of the mortal.
अपश्यं गोपामनिपद्यमानमा च परा च पथिभिश्चरन्तम|	i saw the herdsman him who never stumbles approaching by his pathways and departing.
स सध्रीचीः स विशूचीर्वसान आ वरीवर्ति भुवनेष्वन्तः|	he clothed with gathered and diffusive splendour within the worlds continually travels.
य ईं चकार न सो अस्य वेद य ईं ददर्श हिरुगिन नुतस्मात|	he who hath made him cloth not comprehend him from him who saw him surely is he hidden.
स मातुर्योना परिवीतो अन्तर्बहुप्रजा निर्र्तिमा विवेश|	he yet enveloped in his mothers bosom source of much life hath sunk into destruction.
दयौर्मे पिता जनिता नाभिरत्र बन्धुर्मे माता पर्थिवीमहीयम|	dyaus is my father my begetter kinship is here this great earth is my kin and mother.
उत्तानयोश्चम्वोर्योनिरन्तरत्रा पिता दुहितुर्गर्भमाधात|	between the widespread worldhalves is the birthplace the father laid the daughters germ within it.
पर्छामि तवा परमन्तं पर्थिव्याः पर्छामि यत्र भुवनस्यनाभिः|	i ask thee of the earths extremest limit where is the centre of the world i ask thee.
पर्छामि तवा वर्ष्णो अश्वस्य रेतः पर्छामि वाचः परमं वयोम|	i ask thee of the stallions seed prolific i ask of highest heaven where speech abideth.
इयं वेदिः परो अन्तः पर्थिव्या अयं यज्ञो भुवनस्य नाभिः|	this altar is the earths extremest limit this sacrifice of ours is the worlds centre.
अयं सोमो वर्ष्णो अश्वस्य रेतो बरह्मायं वाचःपरमं वयोम|	the stallions seed prolific is the soma this brahman highest heaven where speech abideth.
सप्तार्धगर्भा भुवनस्य रेतो विष्णोस्तिष्ठन्ति परदिशाविधर्मणि|	seven germs unripened yet are heavens prolific seed their functions they maintain by viṣṇus ordinance.
ते धीतिभिर्मनसा ते विपश्चितः परिभुवः परि भवन्ति विश्वतः|	endued with wisdom through intelligence and thought they compass us about present on every side.
अन वि जानामि यदिवेदमस्मि निण्यः संनद्धो मनसा चरामि|	what thing i truly am i know not clearly mysterious fettered in my mind i wander.
यदा मागन परथमजा रतस्यादिद वचो अश्नुवे भागमस्याः|	when the firstborn of holy law approached me then of this speech i first obtain a portion.
अपां परां एति सवधया गर्भीतोअमर्त्यो मर्त्येना सयोनिः|	back forward goes he grasped by strength inherent the immortal born the brother of the mortal.
ता शश्वन्ता विषूचीना वियन्ता नयन्यं चिक्युर्न निचिक्युरन्यम|	ceaseless they move in opposite directions men mark the one and fail to mark the other.
रचो अक्षरे परमे वयोमन यस्मिन देवा अधि विश्वे निषेदुः|	upon what syllable of holy praisesong as twere their highest heaven the gods repose them.
यस्तन न वेद किं रचा करिष्यति य इत तद विदुस्त इमे समासते|	who knows not this what will he do with praisesong but they who know it well sit here assembled.
सूयवसाद भगवती हि भूया अथो वयं भगवन्तः सयाम|	fortunate mayst thou be with goodly pasture and may we also be exceeding wealthy.
अद्धि तर्णमघ्न्ये विश्वदानीं पिब शुद्धमुदकमाचरन्ती|	feed on the grass o cow at every season and coming hitherward drink limpid water.
गौरीर्मिमाय सलिलानि तक्षत्येकपदी दविपदी सा चतुष्पदी|	forming the waterfloods the buffalo hath lowed onefooted or twofooted or fourfooted she.
अष्टापदी नवपदी बभूवुषी सहस्राक्षरा परमे वयोमन|	who hath become eightfooted or hath got nine feet the thousandsyllabled in the sublimest heaven.
तस्याः समुद्रा अधि वि कषरन्ति तेन जीवन्ति परदिशश्चतस्रः|	from her descend in streams the seas of water thereby the worlds four regions have their being.
ततः कषरत्यक्षरं तद विश्वमुप जीवति|	thence flows the imperishable flood and thence the universe hath life.
शकमयं धूममारादपश्यं विषूवता पर एनावरेण|	i saw from far away the smoke of fuel with spires that rose on high oer that beneath it.
उक्षाणं पर्श्निमपचन्त वीरास्तानि धर्माणि परथमान्यासन|	the mighty men have dressed the spotted bullock these were the customs in the days aforetime.
तरयः केशिन रतुथा वि चक्षते संवत्सरे वपत एक एषाम|	three with long tresses show in ordered season one of them sheareth when the year is ended.
विश्वमेको अभि चष्टे शचीभिर्ध्राजिरेकस्य दद्र्शेन रूपम|	one with his powers the universe regardeth of one the sweep is seen but his figure.
चत्वारि वाक परिमिता पदानि तानि विदुर्ब्राह्मणा ये मनीषिणः|	speech hath been measured out in four divisions the brahmans who have understanding know them.
गुहा तरीणि निहिता नेङगयन्ति तुरीयं वाचो मनुष्या वदन्ति|	three kept in close concealment cause no motion of speech men speak only the fourth division.
इन्द्रं मित्रं वरुणमग्निमाहुरथो दिव्यः स सुपर्णो गरुत्मान|	they call him indra mitra varuṇa agni and he is heavenly noblywinged garutmān.
एकं सद विप्रा बहुधा वदन्त्यग्निं यमं मातरिश्वानमाहुः|	to what is one sages give many a title they call it agni yama mātariśvan.
कर्ष्णं नियानं हरयः सुपर्णा अपो वसाना दिवमुत पतन्ति|	dark the descent the birds are goldencoloured up to the heaven they fly robed in the waters.
त आवव्र्त्रन सदनाद रतस्यादिद घर्तेन पर्थिवी वयुद्यते|	again descend they from the seat of order and all the earth is moistened with their fatness.
दवादश परधयश्चक्रमेकं तरीणि नभ्यानि क उ तच्चिकेत|	twelve are the fellies and the wheel is single three are the naves what man hath understood it.
तस्मिन साकं तरिशता न शङकवोअर्पिताः षष्टिर्न चलाचलासः|	therein are set together spokes three hundred and sixty which in nowise can be loosened.
यस्ते सतनः शशयो यो मयोभूर्येन विश्वा पुष्यसि वार्याणि|	that breast of thine exhaustless spring of pleasure wherewith thou feedest all things that are choicest.
यो रत्नधा वसुविद यः सुदत्रः सरस्वति तमिह धातवे कः|	wealthgiver treasure finder free bestowerbring that sarasvatī that we may drain it.
यज्ञेन यज्ञमयजन्त देवास्तनि धर्माणि परथमान्यासन|	by means of sacrifice the gods accomplished their sacrifice these were the earliest ordinances.
ते ह नाकं महिमानः सचन्त यत्र पूर्वे साध्याः सन्ति देवाः|	these mighty ones attained the height of heaven there where the sādhyas gods of old are dwelling.
समानमेतदुदकमुच्चैत्यव चाहभिः|	uniform with the passing days this water mounts and fails again.
भूमिं पर्जन्या जिन्वन्ति दिवं जिन्वन्त्यग्नयः|	the tempestclouds give life to earth and fires reanimate the heaven.
दिव्यं सुपर्णं वायसं बर्हन्तमपां गर्भं दर्शतमोषधीनाम|	the bird celestial vast with noble pinion the lovely germ of plants the germ of waters.
अभीपतो वर्ष्टिभिस्तर्पयन्तं सरस्वन्तमवसे जोहवीमि|	him who delighteth us with rain in season sarasvān i invoke that he may help us.
तवया वयं मघवन पूर्व्ये धन इन्द्रत्वोताः सासह्याम पर्तन्यतो वनुयाम वनुष्यतः|	helped indra maghavan by thee in war of old may we subdue in fight the men who strive with us conquer the men who war with us.
नेदिष्ठे अस्मिन्नहन्यधि वोचा नु सुन्वते|	this day that now is close at hand bless him who pours the soma juice.
अस्मिन यज्ञे वि चयेमा भरे कर्तं वाजयन्तो भरे कर्तम|	in this our sacrifice may we divide the spoil showing our strength the spoil of war.
सवर्जेषे भर आप्रस्य वक्मन्युषर्बुधः सवस्मिन्नञ्जसिक्राणस्य सवस्मिन्नञ्जसि|	in war which wins the light at the freegivers call at due oblation of the earlyrising one oblation of the active one.
अहन्निन्द्रो यथा विदे शीर्ष्णाशीर्ष्णोपवाच्यः|	indra slew even as we knowwhom each bowed head must reverence.
अस्मत्रा ते सध्र्यक सन्तु रातयो भद्रा भद्रस्य रातयः|	may all thy bounteous gifts be gathered up for us yea the good gifts of thee the good.
तत तु परयः परत्नथा ते शुशुक्वनं यस्मिन यज्ञे वारमक्र्ण्वत कषयं रतस्य वारसि कषयम|	this food glows for thee as of old at sacrifice wherein they made thee chooser of the place for thou choosest the place of sacrifice.
वि तद वोचेरध दवितान्तः पश्यन्ति रश्मिभिः|	speak thou and make it known to us they see within with beams of light.
स घा विदे अन्विन्द्रो गवेषणो बन्धुक्षिद्भ्यो गवेषणः|	indra indeed is found a seeker after spoil spoilseeker for his own allies.
नू इत्था ते पूर्वथा च परवाच्यं यदङगिरोभ्योअव्र्णोरप वरजमिन्द्र शिक्षन्नप वरजम|	so now must thy great deed be lauded as of old when for the aṅgirases thou openedst the stall openedst giving aid the stall.
ऐभ्यः समान्या दिशास्मभ्यं जेषि योत्सि च|	in the same manner for us here fight thou and be victorious.
सुन्वद्भ्यो रन्धया कं चिदव्रतं हर्णायन्तं चिदव्रतम|	to him who pours the juice give up the lawless man the lawless who is wroth with us.
सं यज्जनान करतुभिः शूर ईक्षयद धने हिते तरुषन्त शरवस्यवः पर यक्षन्त शरवस्यवः|	when with wise plan the hero leads the people forth they conquer in the ordered battle seeking fame press eager onward seeking fame.
तस्मा आयुः परजावदिद बाधे अर्चन्त्योजसा|	to him in time of need they sing for life with offspring and with strength.
इन्द्र ओक्यं दिधिषन्त धीतयो देवानछा न धीतयः|	their hymns with indra find a welcome place of rest the hymns go forward to the gods.
युवं तमिन्द्रापर्वता पुरोयुधा यो नः पर्तन्यादप तंतमिद धतं वज्रेअ तंतमिद धतम|	indra and parvata our champions in the fight drive ye away each man who fain would war with us drive him far from us with the bolt.
दूरे चत्ताय छन्त्सद गहनं यदिनक्षत|	welcome to him concealed afar shall he the lair that he hath found.
अस्माकं शत्रून परि शूर विश्वतो दर्मा दर्षीष्ट विश्वतः|	so may the render rend our foes on every side rend them o hero everywhere.
अश्वं न तवा वारवन्तं वन्दध्या अग्निं नमोभिः|	with worship will i glorify thee agni like a longtailed steed.
सम्राजन्तमध्वराणाम|	imperial lord of sacred rites.
स घा नः सूनुः शवसा पर्थुप्रगामा सुशेवः|	may the farstriding son of strength bringer of great felicity.
मीढ्वानस्माकं बभूयात|	who pours his gifts like rain be ours.
स नो दूराच्चासाच्च नि मर्त्यादघायोः|	lord of all life from near from far do thou o agni evermore.
पाहि सदमिद विश्वायुः|	protect us from the sinful man.
इममू षु तवमस्माकं सनिं गायत्रं नव्यांसम|	o agni graciously announce this our oblation to the gods.
अग्ने देवेषु पर वोचः|	and this our newest song of praise.
आ नो भज परमेष्वा वाजेषु मध्यमेषु|	give us a share of strength most high a share of strength that is below.
शिक्षा वस्वोन्तमस्य|	a share of strength that is between.
विभक्तासि चित्रभानो सिन्धोरूर्मा उपाक आ|	thou dealest gifts resplendent one nigh as with waves of sindhu thou.
सद्यो दाशुषे कषरसि|	swift streamest to the worshipper.
यमग्ने पर्त्सु मर्त्यमवा वाजेषु यं जुनाः|	that man is lord of endless strength whom thou protectest in the fight.
स यन्ताशश्वतीरिषः|	agni or urgest to the fray.
नकिरस्य सहन्त्य पर्येता कयस्य चित|	him whosoever he may be no man may vanquish mighty one.
वाजो अस्ति शरवाय्यः|	nay very glorious power is his.
स वाजं विश्वचर्षणिरर्वद्भिरस्तु तरुता|	may he who dwells with all mankind bear us with warsteeds through the fight.
विप्रेभिरस्तु सनिता|	and with the singers win the spoil.
जराबोध तद विविड्ढि विशेविशे यज्ञियाय|	help thou who knowest lauds this work this eulogy to rudra him.
सतोमं रुद्राय दर्शीकम|	adorable in every house.
स नो महाननिमानो धूमकेतुः पुरुश्चन्द्रः|	may this our god great limitless smokebannered excellently bright.
धिये वाजाय हिन्वतु|	urge us to strength and holy thought.
स रेवानिव विश्पतिर्दैव्यः केतुः शर्णोतु नः|	like some rich lord of men may he agni the banner of the gods.
उक्थैरग्निर्ब्र्हद्भानुः|	refulgent hear us through our lauds.
नमो महद्भ्यो नमो अर्भकेभ्यो नमो युवभ्यो नम आशिनेभ्यः|	glory to gods the mighty and the lesser glory to gods the younger and the elder.
यजाम देवान यदि शक्नवाम मा जयायसः शंसमा वर्क्षि देवाः|	let us if we have power pay the god worship no better prayer than this ye gods acknowledge.
मत्स्यपायि ते महः पात्रस्येव हरिवो मत्सरो मदः|	glad thee thy glory hath been quaffed lord of bay steeds as twere the bowls enlivening mead.
वर्षा ते वर्ष्ण इन्दुर्वाजी सहस्रसातमः|	for thee the strong there is strong drink mighty omnipotent to win.
आ नस्ते गन्तु मत्सरो वर्षा मदो वरेण्यः|	let our strong drink most excellent exhilarating come to thee.
सहावानिन्द्रसानसिः पर्तनाषाळ अमर्त्यः|	victorious indra bringing gain immortal conquering in fight.
तवं हि शूरः सनिता चोदयो मनुषो रथम|	thou hero winner of the spoil urgest to speed the car of man.
सहावान दस्युमव्रतमोषः पात्रं न शोचिषा|	burn like a vessel with the flame the lawless dasyu conqueror.
मुषाय सुर्यं कवे चक्रमीशान ओजसा|	empowered by thine own might o sage thou stolest sūryas chariot wheel.
वह शुष्णायवधं कुत्सं वातस्याश्वैः|	thou barest kutsa with the steeds of wind to Śuṣṇa as his death.
शुष्मिन्तमो हि ते मदो दयुम्निन्तम उत करतुः|	most mighty is thy rapturous joy most splendid is thine active power.
वर्त्रघ्ना वरिवोविदा मंसीष्ठा अश्वसातमः|	wherewith foeslaying sending bliss thou art supreme in gaining steeds.
यथा पुर्वेभ्यो जरित्र्भ्य इन्द्र मय इवापो न तर्ष्यते बभूथ|	as thou o indra to the ancient singers wast ever joy as water to the thirsty.
तामनु तवा निविदं जोहवीमि वि|	so unto thee i sing this invocation may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
न नूनमस्ति नो शवः कस्तद वेद यदद्भुतम|	naught is today tomorrow naught who comprehends the mystery.
अन्यस्यचित्तमभि संचरेण्यमुताधीतं वि नश्यति|	we must address ourselves unto anothers thought and lost is then the hope we formed.
किं न इन्द्र जिघांससि भरातरो मरुतस्तव|	the maruts are thy brothers why o indra wouldst thou take our lives.
तेभिः कल्पस्व साधुया मा नः समरणे वधीः|	agree with them in friendly wise and do not slay us in the fight.
किं नो भरातरगस्त्य सखा सन्नति मन्यसे|	agastya brother why dost thou neglect us thou who art our friend.
विद्मा हि तेयथा मनोअस्मभ्यमिन न दित्ससि|	we know the nature of thy mind verity thou wilt give us naught.
अरं कर्ण्वन्तु वेदिं समग्निमिन्धतां पुरः|	let them prepare the altar let them kindle fire in front we two.
तत्राम्र्तस्य चेतनं यज्ञं ते तनवावहै|	here will spread sacrifice for thee that the immortal may observe.
तवमीशिषे वसुपते वसूनां तवं मित्राणां मित्रपते धेष्ठः|	thou lord of wealth art master of all treasures thou lord of friends art thy friends best supporter.
इन्द्र तवं मरुद्भिः सं वदस्वाध पराशान रतुथा हवींषि|	o indra speak thou kindly with the maruts and taste oblations in their proper season.
वया इदग्ने अग्नयस्ते अन्ये तवे विश्वे अम्र्ता मादयन्ते|	the other fires are verily thy branches the immortals all rejoice in thee o agni.
वैश्वानर नाभिरसि कषितीनां सथूणेव जनानुपमिद ययन्थ|	centre art thou vaiśvānara of the people sustaining men like a deepfounded pillar.
मूर्धा दिवो नाभिरग्निः पर्थिव्या अथाभवदरती रोदस्योः|	the forehead of the sky earths centre agni became the messenger of earth and heaven.
तं तवा देवासोअजनयन्त देवं वैश्वानर जयोतिरिदार्याय|	vaiśvānara the deities produced thee a god to be a light unto the Ārya.
आ सूर्ये न रश्मयो धरुवासो वैश्वानरे दधिरेअग्ना वसूनि|	as in the sun firm rays are set for ever treasures are in vaiśvānara in agni.
या पर्वतेष्वोषधीष्वप्सु या मानुषेष्वसि तस्य राजा|	of all the riches in the hills the waters the herbs among mankind thou art the sovran.
बर्हती इव सूनवे रोदसी गिरो होता मनुष्यो न दक्षः|	as the great worldhalves so are their sons praises skilled as a man to act is he the herald.
सवर्वते सत्यशुष्माय पूर्वीर्वैश्वानराय नर्तमाय यह्वीः|	vaiśvānara celestial truly mighty most manly one hath many a youthful consort.
दिवश्चित ते बर्हतो जातवेदो वैश्वानर पर रिरिचे महित्वम|	even the lofty heaven o jātavedas vaiśvānara hath not attained thy greatness.
राजा कर्ष्टीनामसि मानुषीणां युधा देवेभ्यो वरिवश्चकर्थ|	thou art the king of lands where men are settled thou hast brought comfort to the gods in battle.
पर नू महित्वं वर्षभस्य वोचं यं पूरवो वर्त्रहणं सचन्ते|	now will i tell the greatness of the hero whom pūrus sons follow as vṛtras slayer.
वैश्वानरो दस्युमग्निर्जघन्वानधूनोत काष्ठा अव शम्बरं भेत|	agni vaiśvānara struck down the dasyu cleave Śambara through and shattered down his fences.
वैश्वानरो महिम्ना विश्वक्र्ष्टिर्भरद्वाजेषु यजतो विभावा|	vaiśvānara dwelling by his might with all men farshining holy mid the bharadvājas.
शातवनेये शतिनीभिरग्निः पुरुणीथे जरते सून्र्तावान|	is lauded excellent with hundred praises by purūṇītha son of Śatavani.
आ तवा जुवो रारहाणा अभि परयो वायो वहन्त्विह पूर्वपीतये सोमस्य पूर्वपीतये|	vĀyu let fleetfoot coursers bring thee speedily to this our feast to drink first of the juice we pour to the first draught of soma juice.
ऊर्ध्वा ते अनु सून्र्ता मनस्तिष्ठतु जानती|	may our glad hymn discerning well uplifted gratify thy mind.
नियुत्वता रथेना याहि दावने वायो मखस्य दावने|	come with thy teamdrawn car o vāyu to the gift come to the sacrificers gift.
मन्दन्तु तवा मन्दिनो वायविन्दवोअस्मत कराणासः सुक्र्ता अभिद्यवो गोभिः कराणा अभिद्यवः|	may the joygiving drops o vāyu gladden thee effectual well prepared directed to the heavens strong blent with milk and seeking heaven.
यद ध कराणा इरध्यै दक्षं सचन्त ऊतयः|	that aids effectual to fulfil may wait upon our skilful power.
सध्रीचीना नियुतो दावने धिय उप बरुवत ईं धियः|	associate teams come hitherward to grant our prayers they shall address the hymns we sing.
वायुर्युङकते रोहिता वायुररुणा वायू रथे अजिरा धुरि वोळ्हवे वहिष्ठा धुरि वोळ्हवे|	two red steeds vāyu yokes vāyu two purple steeds swiftfooted to the chariot to the pole to draw most able at the pole to draw.
पर बोधया पुरन्धिंजार आ ससतीमिव|	wake up intelligence as when a lover wakes his sleeping love.
पर चक्षय रोदसी वासयोषसः शरवसे वासयोषसः|	illumine heaven and earth make thou the dawns to shine for glory make the dawns to shine.
तुभ्यमुषासः शुचयः परावति भद्रा वस्त्रा तन्वते दंसु रश्मिषु चित्रा नव्येषु रश्मिषु|	for thee the radiant dawns in the fardistant sky broaden their lovely garments forth in wondrous beams brightcoloured in their newborn beams.
तुभ्यं धेनुः सबर्दुघा विश्वा वसूनि दोहते|	for thee the nectaryielding cow pours all rich treasures forth as milk.
अजनयो मरुतो वक्षणाभ्योदिव आ वक्षणाभ्यः|	the marut host hast thou engendered from the womb the maruts from the womb of heaven.
तुभ्यं शुक्रासः शुचयस्तुरण्यवो मदेषूग्रा इषणन्तभुर्वण्यपामिषन्त भुर्वणि|	for thee the pure bright quicklyflowing somadrops strong in their heightening power hasten to mix themselves hasten to the water to be mixed.
तवां तसारी दसमानो भगमीट्टे तक्ववीये|	to thee the weary coward prays for luck that he may speed away.
तवां विश्वस्माद भुवनात पासि धर्मणासुर्यात पासि धर्मण|	thou by thy law protectest us from every world yea from the world of highest gods.
तवं नो वायवेषामपूर्व्यः सोमानां परथमः पीतिमर्हसि सुतानां पीतिमर्हसि|	thou vāyu who hast none before thee first of all hast right to drink these offerings of soma juice hast right to drink the juice outpoured.
उतो विहुत्मतीनां विशां ववर्जुषीणाम|	yea poured by all invoking tribes who free themselves from taint of sin.
विश्वा इत ते धेनवो दुह्र आशिरं घर्तं दुह्रत आशिरम|	for thee all cows are milked to yield the somamilk to yield the butter and the milk.
अग्ने विवस्वदुषसश्चित्रं राधो अमर्त्य|	immortal jātavedas thou manyhued fulgent gift of dawn.
आ दाशुषे जातवेदो वहा तवमद्या देवानुषर्बुधः|	agni this day to him who pays oblations bring the gods who waken with the morn.
जुष्टो हि दूतो असि हव्यवाहनोअग्ने रथीरध्वराणाम|	for thou art offeringbearer and loved messenger the charioteer of sacrifice.
सजूरश्विभ्यामुषसा सुवीर्यमस्मे धेहि शरवो बर्हत|	accordant with the aśvins and with dawn grant us heroic strength and lofty fame.
अद्या दूतं वर्णीमहे वसुमग्निं पुरुप्रियम|	as messenger we choose today agni the good whom many love.
धूमकेतुं भार्जीकं वयुष्टिषु यज्ञानामध्वरश्रियम|	smokebannered spreader of the light at break of day glory of sacrificial rites.
शरेष्ठं यविष्ठमतिथिं सवाहुतं जुष्टं जनाय दाशुषे|	him noblest and most youthful richly worshipped guest dear to the men who offer gifts.
देवानछा यातवे जातवेदसमग्निमीळे वयुष्टिषु|	him agni jātavedas i beseech at dawn that he may bring the gods to us.
सतविष्यामि तवामहं विश्वस्याम्र्त भोजन|	thee agni will i glorify deathless nourisher of the world.
अग्ने तरातारमम्र्तं मियेध्य यजिष्ठं हव्यवाहन|	immortal offeringbearer meet for sacred food preserver best at sacrifice.
सुशंसो बोधि गर्णते यविष्ठ्य मधुजिह्वः सवाहुतः|	tell good things to thy praiser o most youthful god as richly worshipped honeytongued.
परस्कण्वस्य परतिरन्नायुर्जीवसे नमस्या दैव्यं जनम|	and granting to praskaṇva lengthened days of life show honour to the heavenly host.
होतारं विश्ववेदसं सं हि तवा विश इन्धते|	for the men agni kindle thee as all possessor and as priest.
स आ वह पुरुहूत परचेतसोअग्ने देवानिह दरवत|	so agni muchinvoked bring hither with all speed the gods the excellently wise.
सवितारमुषसमश्विना भगमग्निं वयुष्टिषु कषपः|	at dawn of day at night uṣas and savitar the aśvins bhaga agnis self.
कण्वासस्त्वा सुतसोमास इन्धते हव्यवाहं सवध्वर|	skilled in fair rites with soma poured the kaṇvas light thee the oblationwafting god.
पतिर हि अध्वराणाम अग्ने दूतो विशाम असि|	for agni lord of sacrifice and messenger of men art thou.
उषर्बुध आवह सोमपीतये देवानद्य सवर्द्र्शः|	bring thou the gods who wake at dawn who see the light this day to drink the soma juice.
अग्ने पूर्वा अनूषसो विभावसो दीदेथ विश्वदर्षतः|	thou shonest forth o agni after former dawns all visible o rich in light.
असि गरामेष्वविता पुरोहितोअसि यज्ञेषु मानुषः|	thou art our help in battlestrife the friend of man the great high priest in sacrifice.
नि तवा यज्ञस्य साधनमग्ने होतारं रत्विजम|	like manu we will stablish thee agni performer of the rite.
मनुष्वद देव धीमहि परचेतसं जीरं दूतममर्त्यम|	invoker ministering priest exceeding wise the swift immortal messenger.
यद देवानां मित्रमहः पुरोहितोअन्तरो यासि दूत्यम|	when as the gods high priest by many loved thou dost their mission as their nearest friend.
सिन्धोरिव परस्वनितास ऊर्मयोअग्नेर्भ्राजन्ते अर्चयः|	then like the farresounding billows of the flood thy flames o agni roar aloud.
शरुधि शरुत्कर्ण वह्निभिर्देवैरग्ने सयावभिः|	hear agni who hast ears to hear with all thy train of escort gods.
आ सीदन्तु बर्हिषि मित्रो अर्यमा परातर्यावाणो अध्वरम|	let mitra aryaman seeking betimes our rite seat them upon the sacred grass.
शर्ण्वन्तु सतोमं मरुतः सुदानवोअग्निजिह्वा रताव्र्धः|	let those who strengthen law who bountifully give the lifetongued maruts hear our praise.
पिबतु सोमं वरुणो धर्तव्रतोअश्विभ्यामुषसा सजूः|	may lawsupporting varuṇa with the aśvins twain and uṣas drink the soma juice.
गायन्ति तवा गायत्रिणोअर्चन्त्यर्कमर्किणः|	the chanters hymn thee they who say the word of praise magnify thee.
बरह्माणस्त्वा शतक्रत उद वंशमिव येमिरे|	the priests have raised thee up on high o Śatakratu like a pole.
यत सानोः सानुमारुहद भूर्यस्पष्ट कर्त्वम|	as up he clomb from ridge to ridge and looked upon the toilsome task.
तदिन्द्रो अर्थं चेतति यूथेन वर्ष्णिरेजति|	indra observes this wish of his and the rain hastens with his troop.
युक्ष्वा हि केशिना हरी वर्षणा कक्ष्यप्रा|	harness thy pair of strong bay steeds longmaned whose bodies fill the girths.
अथा न इन्द्र सोमपा गिरामुपश्रुतिं चर|	and indra somadrinker come to listen to our songs of praise.
एहि सतोमानभि सवराभि गर्णीह्या रुव|	come hither answer thou the song sing in approval cry aloud.
बरह्म च नो वसोसचेन्द्र यज्ञं च वर्धय|	good indra make our prayer succeed and prosper this our sacrifice.
उक्थमिन्द्राय शंस्यं वर्धनं पुरुनिष्षिधे|	to indra must a laud be said to strengthen him who freely gives.
शक्रो यथा सुतेषु णो रारणत सख्येषु च|	that Śakra may take pleasure in our friendship and drinkofferings.
तमित सखित्व ईमहे तं राये तं सुवीर्ये|	him him we seek for friendship him for riches and heroic might.
स शक्र उत नः शकदिन्द्रो वसु दयमानः|	for indra he is Śakra he shall aid us while he gives us wealth.
सुविव्र्तं सुनिरजमिन्द्र तवादातमिद यशः|	easy to turn and drive away indra is spoil bestowed by thee.
गवामपव्रजं वर्धि कर्णुष्व राधो अद्रिवः|	unclose the stable of the kine and give us wealth o thunderarmed.
नहि तवा रोदसी उभे रघायमाणमिन्वतः|	the heaven and earth contain thee not together in thy wrathful mood.
जेषः सवर्वतीरपः सं गा अस्मभ्यं धूनुहि|	win us the waters of the sky and send us kine abundantly.
आश्रुत्कर्ण शरुधी हवं नू चिद दधिष्व मे गिरः|	hear thou whose ear is quick my call take to thee readily my songs.
इन्द्र सतोममिमं मम कर्ष्वा युजश्चिदन्तरम|	o indra let this laud of mine come nearer even than thy friend.
विद्मा हि तवा वर्षन्तमं वाजेषु हवनश्रुतम|	we know thee mightiest of all in battles hearer of our cry.
वर्षन्तमस्य हूमह ऊतिं सहस्रसातमाम|	of thee most mighty we invoke the aid that giveth thousandfold.
आ तू न इन्द्र कौशिक मन्दसानः सुतं पिब|	o indra son of kuśika drink our libation with delight.
नव्यमायुःप्र सू तिर कर्धी सहस्रसां रषिम|	prolong our life anew and cause the seer to win a thousand gifts.
परि तवा गिर्वणो गिर इमा भवन्तु विश्वतः|	lover of song may these our songs on every side encompass thee.
वर्द्धायुमनु वर्द्धयो जुष्टा भवन्तु जुष्टयः|	strengthening thee of lengthened life may they be dear delights to thee.
मरुतो यस्य हि कषये पाथा दिवो विमहसः|	the best of guardians hath that man within whose dwelling place ye drink.
स सुगोपातमो जनः|	o maruts giants of the sky.
यज्ञैर्वा यज्ञवाहसो विप्रस्य वा मतीनाम|	honoured with sacrifice or with the worship of the sages hymns.
मरुतः शर्णुता हवम|	o maruts listen to the call.
उत वा यस्य वाजिनोअनु विप्रमतक्षत|	yea the strong man to whom ye have vouchsafed to give a sage shall move.
स गन्ता गोमतिव्रजे|	into a stable rich in kine.
अस्य वीरस्य बर्हिषि सुतः सोमो दिविष्टिषु|	upon this heros sacred grass soma is poured in daily rites.
उक्थं मदश्च शस्यते|	praise and delight are sung aloud.
अस्य शरोषन्त्वा भुवो विश्वा यश्चर्षणीरभि|	let the strong maruts hear him him surpassing all men strength be his.
सूरं चित सस्रुषीरिषः|	that reaches even to the sun.
पूर्वीभिर्हि ददाशिम शरद्भिर्मरुतो वयम|	for through the swift gods loving help in many an autumn maruts we.
अवोभिश्चर्षणीनाम|	have offered up our sacrifice.
सुभगः स परयज्यवो मरुतो अस्तु मर्त्यः|	fortunate shall that mortal be o maruts most adorable.
यस्य परयांसिपर्षथ|	whose offerings ye bear away.
शशमानस्य वा नरः सवेदस्य सत्यशवसः|	o heroes truly strong ye know the toil of him who sings your praise.
विदा कामस्यवेनतः|	the hearts desire of him who loves.
यूयं तत सत्यशवस आविष कर्त महित्वना|	o ye of true strength make this thing manifest by your greatness strike.
विध्यता विद्युता रक्षः|	the demon with your thunderbolt.
गूहता गुह्यं तमो वि यात विश्वमत्रिणम|	conceal the horrid darkness drive far from us each devouring fiend.
जयोतिष कर्ता यदुश्मसि|	create the light for which we long.
इदं शरेष्ठं जयोतिषां जयोतिरागाच्चित्रः परकेतो अजनिष्ट विभ्वा|	this light is come amid all lights the fairest born is the brilliant farextending brightness.
यथा परसूता सवितुः सवयमेवा रात्र्युषसे योनिमारैक|	night sent away for savitars uprising hath yielded up a birthplace for the morning.
रुशद्वत्सा रुशती शवेत्यागादारैगु कर्ष्णा सदनान्यस्याः|	the fair the bright is come with her white offspring to her the dark one hath resigned her dwelling.
समानबन्धू अम्र्ते अनुची दयावा वर्णं चरत आमिनाने|	akin immortal following each other changing their colours both the heavens move onward.
समानो अध्वा सवस्रोरनन्तस्तमन्यान्या चरतो देवशिष्टे|	common unending is the sisters pathway taught by the gods alternately they travel.
न मेथेते न तस्थतुः सुमेके नक्तोषासा समनसा विरूपे|	fairformed of different hues and yet oneminded night and dawn clash not neither do they travel.
भास्वती नेत्री सून्र्तानामचेति चित्रा वि दुरो न आवः|	bright leader of glad sounds our eyes behold her splendid in hue she hath unclosed the portals.
परार्प्या जगद वयु नो रायो अख्यदुषा अजीगर्भुवनानि विश्वा|	she stirring up the world hath shown us riches dawn hath awakened every living creature.
जिह्मश्ये चरितवे मघोन्याभोगय इष्टये राय उ तवम|	rich dawn she sets afoot the coiledup sleeper one for enjoyment one for wealth or worship.
दभ्रं पश्यद्भ्य उर्विया विचक्ष उषा|	those who saw little for extended vision all living creatures hath the dawn awakened.
कषत्राय तवं शरवसे तवं महीया इष्टये तवमर्थमिवत्वमित्यै|	one to high sway one to exalted glory one to pursue his gain and one his labour.
विसद्र्शा जीविताभिप्रचक्ष उषा|	all to regard their different vocations all moving creatures hath the dawn awakened.
एषा दिवो दुहिता परत्यदर्शि वयुछन्ती युवतिः शुक्रवासाः|	we see her there the child of heaven apparent the young maid flushing in her shining raiment.
विश्वस्येशाना पार्थिवस्य वस्व उषो अद्येह सुभगेव्युछ|	thou sovran lady of all earthly treasure flush on us here auspicious dawn this morning.
परायतीनामन्वेति पाथ आयतीनां परथमा शश्वतीनाम|	she first of endless morns to come hereafter follows the path of morns that have departed.
वयुछन्ती जीवमुदीरयन्त्युषा मर्तं कं चन बोधयन्ती|	dawn at her rising urges forth the living him who is dead she wakes not from his slumber.
उषो यदग्निं समिधे चकर्थ वि यदावश्चक्षसा सूर्यस्य|	as thou dawn hast caused agni to be kindled and with the suns eye hast revealed creation.
यन मानुषान यक्ष्यमाणानजीगस्तद देवेषु चक्र्षे भद्रमप्नः|	and hast awakened men to offer worship thou hast performed for gods a noble service.
कियात्या यत समया भवाति या वयूषुर्याश्च नूनंव्युछान|	how long a time and they shall be togetherdawns that have shone and dawns to shine hereafter.
अनु पूर्वाः कर्पते वावशाना परदीध्याना जोषमन्याभिरेति|	she yearns for former dawns with eager longing and goes forth gladly shining with the others.
ईयुष टे ये पूर्वतरामपश्यन वयुछन्तीमुषसं मर्त्यासः|	gone are the men who in the days before us looked on the rising of the earlier morning.
अस्माभिरू नु परतिचक्ष्याभूदो ते यन्ति ये अपरीषु पश्यान|	we we the living now behold her brightness and they come nigh who shall hereafter see her.
यावयद्द्वेषा रतपा रतेजाः सुम्नावरी सून्र्ता ईरयन्ती|	foechaser born of law the laws protectress joygiver waker of all pleasant voices.
सुमङगलीर्बिभ्रती देववीतिमिहाद्योषः शरेष्ठतमाव्युछ|	auspicious bringing food for gods enjoyment shine on us here most bright o dawn this morning.
शश्वत पुरोषा वयुवास देव्यथो अद्येदं वयावो मघोनी|	from days eternal hath dawn shone the goddess and shows this light today endowed with riches.
अथो वयुछादुत्तराननु दयूनजराम्र्ता चरति सवधाभिः|	so will she shine on days to come immortal she moves on in her own strength undecaying.
वयञ्जिभिर्दिव आतास्वद्यौदप कर्ष्णां निर्णिजं देव्यावः|	in the skys borders hath she shone in splendour the goddess hath thrown off the veil of darkness.
परबोधयन्त्यरुणेभिरश्वैरोषा याति सुयुजा रथेन|	awakening the world with purple horses on her wellharnessed chariot dawn approaches.
आवहन्ती पोष्या वार्याणि चित्रं केतुं कर्णुते चेकिताना|	bringing all lifesustaining blessings with her showing herself she sends forth brilliant lustre.
ईयुषीणामुपमा शश्वतीनां विभातीनां परथमोषा वयश्वैत|	last of the countless mornings that have vanished first of bright morns to come hath dawn arisen.
उदीर्ध्वं जीवो असुर्न आगादप परागात तम आ जयोतिरेति|	arise the breath the life again hath reached us darkness hath passed away and light approacheth.
आरैक पन्थां यातवे सूर्यायागन्म यत्र परतिरन्त आयुः|	she for the sun hath left a path to travel we have arrived where men prolong existence.
सयूमना वाच उदियर्ति वह्नि सतवानो रेभ उषसो विभातीः|	singing the praises of refulgent mornings with his hymns web the priest the poet rises.
अद्या तदुछ गर्णते मघोन्यस्मे आयुर्नि दिदीहि परजावत|	shine then today rich maid on him who lauds thee shine down on us the gift of life and offspring.
या गोमतीरुषसः सर्ववीरा वयुछन्ति दाशुषे मर्त्याय|	dawns giving sons all heroes kine and horses shining upon the man who brings oblations.
वायोरिव सून्र्तानामुदर्के ता अश्वदा अश्नवत सोमसुत्वा|	these let the somapresser gain when ending his glad songs louder than the voice of vāyu.
माता देवानामदितेरनीकं यज्ञस्य केतुर्ब्र्हती वि भाहि|	mother of gods aditis form of glory ensign of sacrifice shine forth exalted.
परशस्तिक्र्द बरह्मणे नो वयुछा नो जने जनय विश्ववारे|	rise up bestowing praise on our devotion allbounteous make us chief among the people.
यच्चित्रमप्न उषसो वहन्तीजानाय शशमानाय भद्रम|	whatever splendid wealth the dawns bring with them to bless the man who offers praise and worship.
तन नो|	even that may mitra varuṇa vouchsafe us and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
चित्रं देवानामुदगादनीकं चक्षुर्मित्रस्य वरुणस्याग्नेः|	the brilliant presence of the gods hath risen the eye of mitra varuṇa and agni.
आप्रा दयावाप्र्थिवी अन्तरिक्षं सूर्य आत्मा जगतस्तस्थुषश्च|	the soul of all that moveth not or moveth the sun hath filled the air and earth and heaven.
सूर्यो देवीमुषसं रोचमानां मर्यो न योषामभ्येति पश्चात|	like as a young man followeth a maiden so doth the sun the dawn refulgent goddess.
यत्रा नरो देवयन्तो युगानि वितन्वते परति भद्राय भद्रम|	where pious men extend their generations before the auspicious one for happy fortune.
भद्रा अश्वा हरितः सूर्यस्य चित्रा एतग्वा अनुमाद्यासः|	auspicious are the suns baycoloured horses bright changing hues meet for our shouts of triumph.
नमस्यन्तो दिव आ पर्ष्ठमस्थुः परि दयावाप्र्थिवी यन्ति सद्यः|	bearing our prayers the skys ridge have they mounted and in a moment speed round earth and heaven.
तत सूर्यस्य देवत्वं तन महित्वं मध्या कर्तोर्विततं सं जभार|	this is the godhead this might of sūrya he hath withdrawn what spread oer work unfinished.
यदेदयुक्त हरितः सधस्थादाद रात्री वासस्तनुते सिमस्मै|	when he hath loosed his horses from their station straight over all night spreadeth out her garment.
तन मित्रस्य वरुणस्याभिचक्षे सूर्यो रूपं कर्णुते दयोरुपस्थे|	in the skys lap the sun this form assumeth that varuṇa and mitra may behold it.
अनन्तमन्यद रुशदस्य पाजः कर्ष्णमन्यद धरितः सं भरन्ति|	his bay steeds well maintain his power eternal at one time bright and darksome at another.
अद्या देवा उदिता सूर्यस्य निरंहसः पिप्र्ता नरवद्यात|	this day o gods while sūrya is ascending deliver us from trouble and dishonour.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
वि हयख्यं मनसा वस्य इछन्निन्द्राग्नी जञास उत वा सजातान|	longing for weal i looked around in spirit for kinsmen indraagni or for brothers.
नान्या युवत परमतिरस्ति मह्यं स वां धियं वाजयन्तीमतक्षम|	no providence but yours alone is with me so have i wrought for you this hymn for succour.
अश्रवं हि भूरिदावत्तरा वां विजामातुरुत वा घा सयालात|	for i have heard that ye give wealth more freely than worthless soninlaw or spouses brother.
अथा सोमस्य परयती युवभ्यामिन्द्राग्नी सतोमं जनयामि नव्यम|	so offering to you this draught of soma i make you this new hymn indra and agni.
मा छेद्म रश्मीन्रिति नाधमानाः पितॄणां शक्तीरनुयछमानाः|	let us not break the cords with this petition we strive to gain the powers of our forefathers.
इन्द्राग्निभ्यां कं वर्षणो मदन्ति ता हयद्री धिषणाया उपस्थे|	for indraagni the strong drops are joyful for here in the bowls lap are both the pressstones.
युवाभ्यां देवी धिषणा मदायेन्द्राग्नी सोममुशती सुनोति|	for you the bowl divine indra and agni presses the soma gladly to delight you.
तावश्विना भद्रहस्ता सुपाणी आ धावतं मधुना पर्ङकतमप्सु|	with hands auspicious and fair arms ye aśvins haste sprinkle it with sweetness in the waters.
युवामिन्द्राग्नी वसुनो विभागे तवस्तमा शुश्रव वर्त्रहत्ये|	you i have heard were mightiest indraagni when vṛtra fell and when the spoil was parted.
तावासद्या बर्हिषि यज्ञे अस्मिन पर चर्षणी मादयेथां सुतस्य|	sit at this sacrifice ye ever active on the strewn grass and with the juice delight you.
पर चर्षणिभ्यः पर्तनाहवेषु पर पर्थिव्या रिरिचाथे दिवश्च|	surpassing all men where they shout for battle ye twain exceed the earth and heaven in greatness.
पर सिन्धुभ्यः पर गिरिभ्यो महित्वा परेन्द्राग्नी विश्वा भुवनात्यन्या|	greater are ye than rivers and than mountains o indraagni and all things beside them.
आ भरतं शिक्षतं वज्रबाहू अस्मानिन्द्राग्नी अवतं शचीभिः|	bring wealth and give it ye whose arms wield thunder indra and agni with your powers protect us.
इमे नु ते रश्मयः सूर्यस्य येभिः सपित्वं पितरो न आसन|	now of a truth these be the very sunbeams wherewith our fathers were of old united.
पुरन्दरा शिक्षतं वज्रहस्तास्मानिन्द्राग्नी अवतं भरेषु|	give ye who shatter forts whose hands wield thunder indra and agni save us in our battles.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
परति तयं चारुमध्वरं गोपीथाय पर हूयसे|	to this fair sacrifice to drink the milky draught thou art invoked.
मरुद्भिरग्न आ गहि|	o agni with the maruts come.
नहि देवो न मर्त्यो महस्तव करतुं परः|	no mortal man no god exceeds thy mental power o mighty one.
म|	o agni with the maruts come.
ये महो रजसो विदुर्विश्वे देवासो अद्रुहः|	all gods devoid of guile who know the mighty region of midair.
म|	o agni with those maruts come.
य उग्रा अर्कमान्र्चुरनाध्र्ष्टास ओजसा|	the terrible who sing their song not to be overcome by might.
म|	o agni with those maruts come.
ये शुभ्रा घोरवर्पसः सुक्षत्रासो रिशादसः|	brilliant and awful in their form mighty devourers of their foes.
म|	o agni with those maruts come.
ये नाकस्याधि रोचने दिवि देवास आसते|	who sit as deities in heaven above the skyvaults luminous sphere.
म|	o agni with those maruts come.
य ईङखयन्ति पर्वतान तिरः समुद्रमर्णवम|	who scatter clouds about the sky away over the billowy sea.
म|	o agni with those maruts come.
आ ये तन्वन्ति रश्मिभिस्तिरः समुद्रमोजसा|	who with their bright beams spread them forth over the ocean in their might.
म|	o agni with those maruts come.
अभि तवा पूर्वपीतये सर्जामि सोम्यं मधु|	for thee to be thine early draught i pour the somamingled meath.
म|	o agni with the maruts come.
जुषस्व सप्रथस्तमं वचो देवप्सरस्तमम|	accept our loudestsounding hymn food most delightful to the gods.
हव्या जुह्वानासनि|	pouring our offerings in thy mouth.
अथा ते अङगिरस्तमाग्ने वेधस्तम परियम|	now agni will we say to thee o wisest and best aṅgiras.
वोचेम बरह्म सानसि|	our precious muchavailing prayer.
कस्ते जामिर्जनानामग्ने को दाश्वध्वरः|	who agni is thy kin of men who is thy worthy worshipper.
को ह कस्मिन्नसि शरितः|	on whom dependent who art thou.
तवं जामिर्जनानामग्ने मित्रो असि परियः|	the kinsman agni of mankind their well beloved friend art thou.
सखा सखिभ्य ईड्यः|	a friend whom friends may supplicate.
यजा नो मित्रावरुणा यजा देवान रतं बर्हत|	bring to us mitra varuṇa bring the gods to mighty sacrifice.
अग्ने यक्षिस्वं दमम|	bring them o agni to thine home.
विष्णोर्नु कं वीर्याणि पर वोचं यः पार्थिवानि विममेरजांसि|	i will declare the mighty deeds of viṣṇu of him who measured out the earthly regions.
यो अस्कभायदुत्तरं सधस्थं विचक्रमाणस्त्रेधोरुगायः|	who propped the highest place of congregation thrice setting down his footstep widely striding.
पर तद विष्णु सतवते वीर्येण मर्गो न भीमः कुचरो गिरिष्ठाः|	for this his mighty deed is viṣṇu lauded like some wild beast dread prowling mountainroaming.
यस्योरुषु तरिषु विक्रमणेष्वधिक्षियन्ति भुवनानि विश्वा|	he within whose three wideextended paces all living creatures have their habitation.
पर विष्णवे शूषमेतु मन्म गिरिक्षित उरुगायाय वर्ष्णे|	let the hymn lift itself as strength to viṣṇu the bull farstriding dwelling on the mountains.
य इदं दीर्घं परयतं सधस्थमेको विममे तरिभिरित पदेभिः|	him who alone with triple step hath measured this common dwellingplace long far extended.
यस्य तरी पूर्णा मधुना पदान्यक्षीयमाणा सवधयामदन्ति|	him whose three places that are filled with sweetness imperishable joy as it may list them.
य उ तरिधातु पर्तिवीमुत दयामेको दाधार भुवनानि विश्वा|	who verily alone upholds the threefold the earth the heaven and all living creatures.
तदस्य परियमभि पाथो अश्यां नरो यत्र देवयवो मदन्ति|	may i attain to that his wellloved mansion where men devoted to the gods are happy.
उरुक्रमस्य स हि बन्धुरित्था विष्णोः पदे परमे मध्व उत्सः|	for there springs close akin to the widestrider the well of meath in viṣṇus highest footstep.
ता वं वास्तून्युश्मसि गमध्यै यत्र गावो भूरिश्र्ङगायासः|	fain would we go unto your dwellingplaces where there are manyhorned and nimble oxen.
अत्राह तदुरुगायस्य वर्ष्णः परमं पदमव भाति भूरि|	for mightily there shineth down upon us the widelystriding bulls sublimest mansion.
यच्चिद धि ते विशो यथा पर देव वरुण वरतम|	whatever law of thine o god o varuṇa as we are men.
मिनीमसिद्यविदयवि|	day after day we violate.
मा नो वधाय हत्नवे जिहीळानस्य रीरधः|	give us not as a prey to death to be destroyed by thee in wrath.
मा हर्णानस्य मन्यवे|	to thy fierce anger when displeased.
वि मर्ळीकाय ते मनो रथीरश्वं न सन्दितम|	to gain thy mercy varuṇa with hymns we bind thy heart as binds.
गीर्भिर्वरुण सीमहि|	the charioteer his tethered horse.
परा हि मे विमन्यवः पतन्ति वस्यैष्टये|	they flee from me dispirited bent only on obtaining wealth.
वयो न वसतीरुप|	as to their nests the birds of air.
कदा कषत्रश्रियं नरमा वरुणं करामहे|	when shall we bring to be appeased the hero lord of warrior might.
मर्ळीकायोरुचक्षसम|	him the farseeing varuṇa.
तदित समानमाशाते वेनन्ता न पर युछतः|	this this with joy they both accept in common never do they fail.
धर्तव्रताय दाशुषे|	the everfaithful worshipper.
वेदा यो वीनां पदमन्तरिक्षेण पतताम|	he knows the path of birds that fly through heaven and sovran of the sea.
वेद नावः समुद्रियः|	he knows the ships that are thereon.
वेद मासो धर्तव्रतो दवादश परजावतः|	true to his holy law he knows the twelve moons with their progeny.
वेदा य उपजायते|	he knows the moon of later birth.
वेद वातस्य वर्तनिमुरोर्र्ष्वस्य बर्हतः|	he knows the pathway of the wind the spreading high and mighty wind.
वेदा ये अध्यासते|	he knows the gods who dwell above.
नि षसाद धर्तव्रतो वरुणः पस्त्यास्वा|	varuṇa true to holy law sits down among his people he.
साम्राज्याय सुक्रतुः|	most wise sits there to govern all.
अतो विश्वान्यद्भुता चिकित्वानभि पश्यति|	from thence perceiving he beholds all wondrous things both what hath been.
कर्तानि या चकर्त्वा|	and what hereafter will be done.
स नो विश्वाहा सुक्रतुरादित्यः सुपथा करत|	may that Āditya very wise make fair paths for us all our days.
पर ण आयूंषि तारिषत|	may he prolong our lives for us.
बिभ्रद दरापिं हिरण्ययं वरुणो वस्त निर्णिजम|	varuṇa wearing golden mail hath clad him in a shining robe.
परि सपशो नि षेदिरे|	his spies are seated found about.
न यं दिप्सन्ति दिप्सवो न दरुह्वाणो जनानाम|	the god whom enemies threaten not nor those who tyrannize oer men.
न देवमभिमातयः|	nor those whose minds are bent on wrong.
उत यो मानुषेष्वा यशश्चक्रे असाम्या|	he who gives glory to mankind not glory that is incomplete.
अस्माकमुदरेष्वा|	to our own bodies giving it.
परा मे यन्ति धीतयो गावो न गव्यूतीरनु|	yearning for the wideseeing one my thoughts move onward unto him.
इछन्तीरुरुचक्षसम|	as kine unto their pastures move.
सं नु वोचावहै पुनर्यतो मे मध्वाभ्र्तम|	once more together let us speak because my meath is brought priestlike.
होतेव कषदसे परियम|	thou eatest what is dear to thee.
दर्शं नु विश्वदर्षतं दर्शं रथमधि कषमि|	now saw i him whom all may see i saw his car above the earth.
एता जुषत मे गिरः|	he hath accepted these my songs.
इमं मे वरुण शरुधी हवमद्या च मर्ळय|	varuṇa hear this call of mine be gracious unto us this day.
तवामवस्युरा चके|	longing for help i cried to thee.
तवं विश्वस्य मेधिर दिवश्च गमश्च राजसि|	thou o wise god art lord of all thou art the king of earth and heaven.
स यामनिप्रति शरुधि|	hear as thou goest on thy way.
उदुत्तमं मुमुग्धि नो वि पाशं मध्यमं चर्त|	release us from the upper bond untie the bond between and loose.
अवाधमानि जीवसे|	the bonds below that i may live.
हवयाम्य अग्निम परथमं सवस्तये हवयामि मित्रावरुणाव इहावसे|	agni i first invoke for our prosperity i call on mitra varuṇa to aid us here.
हवयामि रात्रीं जगतो निवेशनीं हवयामि देवं सवितारम ऊतये|	i call on night who gives rest to all moving life i call on savitar the god to lend us help.
आ कर्ष्णेन रजसा वर्तमानो निवेशयन्न अम्र्तम मर्त्यं च|	throughout the dusky firmament advancing laying to rest the immortal and the mortal.
हिरण्ययेन सविता रथेना देवो याति भुवनानि पश्यन|	borne in his golden chariot he cometh savitar god who looks on every creature.
याति देवः परवता यात्य उद्वता याति शुभ्राभ्यां यजतो हरिभ्याम|	the god moves by the upward path the downward with two bright bays adorable he journeys.
आ देवो याति सविता परावतो ऽप विश्वा दुरिता बाधमानः|	savitar comes the god from the far distance and chases from us all distress and sorrow.
अभीव्र्तं कर्शनैर विश्वरूपं हिरण्यशम्यं यजतो बर्हन्तम|	his chariot decked with pearl of various colours lofty with golden pole the god hath mounted.
आस्थाद रथं सविता चित्रभानुः कर्ष्णा रजांसि तविषीं दधानः|	the manyrayed one savitar the holy bound bearing power and might for darksome regions.
वि जनाञ्छ्यावाः शितिपादो अख्यन रथं हिरण्यप्ररौगं वहन्तः|	drawing the goldyoked car his bays whitefooted have manifested light to all the peoples.
शश्वद विशः सवितुर दैव्यस्योपस्थे विश्वा भुवनानि तस्थुः|	held in the lap of savitar divine one all men all beings have their place for ever.
तिस्रो दयावः सवितुर दवा उपस्थां एका यमस्य भुवने विराषाट|	three heavens there are two savitars adjacent in yamas world is one the home of heroes.
आणिं न रथ्यम अम्र्ताधि तस्थुर इह बरवीतु य उ तच चिकेतत|	as on a linchpin firm rest things immortal he who hath known it let him here declare it.
वि सुपर्णो अन्तरिक्षाण्य अख्यद गभीरवेपा असुरः सुनीथः|	he strong of wing hath lightened up the regions deepquivering asura the gentle leader.
कवेदानीं सूर्यः कश चिकेत कतमां दयां रश्मिर अस्या ततान|	where now is sūrya where is one to tell us to what celestial sphere his ray hath wandered.
अष्टौ वय अख्यत ककुभः पर्थिव्यास तरी धन्व योजना सप्त सिन्धून|	the earths eight points his brightness hath illumined three desert regions and the seven rivers.
हिरण्याक्षः सविता देव आगाद दधद रत्ना दाशुषे वार्याणि|	god savitar the goldeyed hath come hither giving choice treasures unto him who worships.
हिरण्यपाणिः सविता विचर्षणिर उभे दयावाप्र्थिवी अन्तर ईयते|	the goldenhanded savitar farseeing goes on his way between the earth and heaven.
अपामीवाम बाधते वेति सूर्यम अभि कर्ष्णेन रजसा दयाम रणोति|	drives away sickness bids the sun approach us and spreads the bright sky through the darksome region.
हिरण्यहस्तो असुरः सुनीथः सुम्र्ळीकः सववान यात्वर्वां|	may he goldhanded asura kind leader come hither to us with his help and favour.
अपसेधन रक्षसो यातुधानानस्थाद देवः परतिदोषं गर्णानः|	driving off rākṣasas and yātudhānas the god is present praised in hymns at evening.
ये ते पन्थाः सवितः पूर्व्यासोअरेणवः सुक्र्ता अन्तरिक्षे|	o savitar thine ancient dustless pathways are well established in the airs midregion.
तेभिर्नो अद्य पथिभिः सुगेभी रक्षा च नो अधि च बरूहि देव|	o god come by those paths so fair to travel preserve thou us from harm this day and bless us.
कद रुद्राय परचेतसे मीळ्हुष्टमाय तव्यसे|	what shall we sing to rudra strong most bounteous excellently wise.
वोचेम शन्तमं हर्दे|	that shall be dearest to his heart.
यथा नो अदितिः करत पश्वे नर्भ्यो यथा गवे|	that aditi may grant the grace of rudra to our folk our kine.
यथा तोकाय रुद्रियम|	our cattle and our progeny.
यथा नो मित्रो वरुणो यथा रुद्रश्चिकेतति|	that mitra and that varuṇa that rudra may remember us.
यथा विश्वे सजोषसः|	yea all the gods with one accord.
गाथपतिं मेधपतिं रुद्रं जलाषभेषजम|	to rudra lord of sacrifice of hymns and balmy medicines.
तच्छंयोः सुम्नमीमहे|	we pray for joy and health and strength.
यः शुक्र इव सूर्यो हिरण्यमिव रोचते|	he shines in splendour like the sun refulgent as bright gold is he.
शरेष्ठो देवानां वसुः|	the good the best among the gods.
शं नः करत्यर्वते सुगं मेषाय मेष्ये|	may he grant health into our steeds wellbeing to our rams and ewes.
नर्भ्यो नारिभ्यो गवे|	to men to women and to kine.
अस्मे सोम शरियमधि नि धेहि शतस्य नर्णाम|	o soma set thou upon us the glory of a hundred men.
महि शरवस्तुविन्र्म्णम|	the great renown of mighty chiefs.
मा नः सोमपरिबाधो मारातयो जुहुरन्त|	let not malignities nor those who trouble soma hinder us.
आ न इन्दो वाजे भज|	indu give us a share of strength.
यास्ते परजा अम्र्तस्य परस्मिन धामन्न्र्तस्य|	soma head central point love these soma know these as serving thee.
मूर्धा नाभा सोम वेन आभूषन्तीः सोम वेदः|	children of thee immortal at the highest place of holy law.
भवा मित्रो न शेव्यो घर्तासुतिर्विभूतद्युम्न एवया उ सप्रथाः|	farshining widely famed going thy wonted way fed with the oil be helpful mitralike to us.
अधा ते विष्णो विदुषा चिदर्ध्य सतोमो यज्ञश्चराध्यो हविष्मता|	so viṣṇu een the wise must swell thy song of praise and he who hath oblations pay thee solemn rites.
यः पूर्व्याय वेधसे नवीयसे सुमज्जानये विष्णवे ददाशति|	he who brings gifts to him the ancient and the last to viṣṇu who ordains together with his spouse.
यो जातमस्य महतो महि बरवत सेदु शरवोभिर्युज्यं चिदभ्यसत|	who tells the lofty birth of him the lofty one shall verily surpass in glory een his peer.
तमु सतोतारः पूर्व्यं यथा विद रतस्य गर्भं जनुषापिपर्तन|	him have ye satisfied singers as well as ye know primeval germ of order even from his birth.
आस्य जानन्तो नाम चिद विवक्तन महस्ते विष्णो सुमतिं भजामहे|	ye knowing een his name have told it forth may we viṣṇu enjoy the grace of thee the mighty one.
तमस्य राजा वरुणस्तमश्विना करतुं सचन्त मारुतस्य वेधसः|	the sovran varuṇa and both the aśvins wait on this the will of him who guides the marut host.
दाधार दक्षमुत्तममहर्विदं वरजं च विष्णुः सखिवानपोर्णुते|	viṣṇu hath power supreme and might that finds the day and with his friend unbars the stable of the kine.
आ यो विवाय सचथाय दैव्य इन्द्राय विष्णुः सुक्र्ते सुक्र्त्तरः|	even he the heavenly one who came for fellowship viṣṇu to indra godly to the godlier.
वेधा अजिन्वत तरिषधस्थ आर्यं रतस्य भागे यजमानमाभजत|	who maker throned in three worlds helps the Āryan man and gives the worshipper his share of holy law.
इन्द्रावरुणयोरहं सम्राजोरव आ वर्णे|	i crave help from the imperial lords from indravaruṇa may they.
ता नो मर्ळातीद्र्शे|	both favour one of us like me.
गन्तारा हि सथोअवसे हवं विप्रस्य मावतः|	guardians of men ye ever come with ready succour at the call.
धर्ताराचर्षणीनाम|	of every singer such as i.
अनुकामं तर्पयेथामिन्द्रावरुण राय आ|	sate you according to your wish o indravaruṇa with wealth.
ता वां नेदिष्ठमीमहे|	fain would we have you nearest us.
युवाकु हि शचीनां युवाकु सुमतीनाम|	may we be sharers of the powers sharers of the benevolence.
भूयाम वाजदाव्नाम|	of you who give strength bounteously.
इन्द्रः सहस्रदाव्नां वरुणः शंस्यानाम|	indra and varuṇa among givers of thousands meet for praise.
करतुर्भवत्युक्थ्यः|	are powers who merit highest laud.
तयोरिदवसा वयं सनेम नि च धीमहि|	through their protection may we gain great store of wealth and heap it up.
सयादुत पररेचनम|	enough and still to spare be ours.
इन्द्रावरुण वामहं हुवे चित्राय राधसे|	o indravaruṇa on you for wealth in many a form i call.
अस्मान सु जिग्युषस कर्तम|	still keep ye us victorious.
इन्द्रावरुण नू नु वां सिषासन्तीषु धीष्वा|	o indravaruṇa through our songs that seek to win you to ourselves.
अस्मभ्यं शर्म यछतम|	give us at once your sheltering help.
पर वामश्नोतु सुष्टुतिरिन्द्रावरुण यां हुवे|	o indravaruṇa to you may fair praise which i offer come.
यां रधाथे सधस्तुतिम|	joint eulogy which ye dignify.
इमं सतोममर्हते जातवेदसे रथमिव सं महेमा मनीषया|	for jātavedas worthy of our praise will we frame with our mind this eulogy as twere a car.
भद्रा हि नः परमतिरस्य संसद्यग्ने सख्ये मा रिषामा वयं तव|	for good in his assembly is this care of ours let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
यस्मै तवमायजसे स साधत्यनर्वा कषेति दधते सुवीर्यम|	the man for whom thou sacrificest prospereth dwelleth without a foe gaineth heroic might.
स तूताव नैनमश्नोत्यंहतिरग्ने|	he waxeth strong distress never approacheth him let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
शकेम तवा समिधं साधया धियस्त्वे देवा हविरदन्त्याहुतम|	may we have power to kindle thee fulfil our thoughts in thee the gods eat the presented offering.
तवमादित्याना वह तान हयुश्मस्यग्ने|	bring hither the Ādityas for we long for them let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
भरामेध्मं कर्णवामा हवींषि ते चितयन्तः पर्वणापर्वणा वयम|	we will bring fuel and prepare burnt offerings reminding thee at each successive festival.
जीवातवे परतरं साधया धियोअग्ने|	fulfil our thought that so we may prolong our lives let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
विशां गोपा अस्य चरन्ति जन्तवो दविपच्च यदुत चतुष्पदक्तुभिः|	his ministers move forth the guardians of the folk protecting quadruped and biped with their rays.
चित्रः परकेत उषसो महानस्य अग्ने|	mighty art thou the wondrous herald of the dawn let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
तवमध्वर्युरुत होतासि पूर्व्यः परशास्ता पोता जनुषा पुरोहितः|	thou art presenter and the chief invoker thou director purifier great high priest by birth.
विश्वा विद्वानार्त्विज्या धीर पुष्यस्यग्ने|	knowing all priestly work thou perfectest it sage let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
यो विश्वतः सुप्रतीकः सद्रंं असि दूरे चित सन तळिदिवाति रोचसे|	lovely of form art thou alike on every side though far thou shinest brightly as if close at hand.
रात्र्याश्चिदन्धो अति देव पश्यस्यग्ने|	o god thou seest through even the dark of night let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
पूर्वो देवा भवतु सुन्वतो रथोअस्माकं शंसो अभ्यस्तु दूढ्यः|	gods foremost be his car who pours libations out and let our hymn prevail oer evilhearted men.
तदा जानीतोत पुष्यता वचोअग्ने|	attend to this our speech and make it prosper well let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
वधैर्दुःशंसानप दूढ्यो जहि दूरे वा ये अन्ति वा के चिदत्रिणः|	smite with thy weapons those of evil speech and thought devouring demons whether near or tar away.
अथा यज्ञाय गर्णते सुगं कर्ध्यग्ने|	then to the singer give free way for sacrifice let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
यदयुक्था अरुषा रोहिता रथे वातजूता वर्षभस्येव तेरवः|	when to thy chariot thou hadst yoked two red steeds and two ruddy steeds windsped thy roar was like a bulls.
आदिन्वसि वनिनो धूमकेतुनाग्ने|	thou with smokebannered flame attackest forest trees let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
अध सवनादुत बिभ्युः पतत्रिणो दरप्सा यत ते यवसादो वयस्थिरन|	then at thy roar the very birds are terrified when eatingup the grass thy sparks fly forth abroad.
सुगं तत ते तावकेभ्यो रथेभ्योअग्ने|	then is it easy for thee and thy car to pass let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
अयं मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धायसेअवयातां मरुतां हेळो अद्भुतः|	he hath the power to soothe mitra and varuṇa wonderful is the maruts wrath when they descend.
मर्ळा सु नो भूत्वेषां मनः पुनरग्ने|	be gracious let their hearts he turned to us again let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
देवो देवानामसि मित्रो अद्भुतो वसुर्वसूनामसि चारुरध्वरे|	thou art a god thou art the wondrous friend of gods the vasu of the vasus fair in sacrifice.
शर्मन सयाम तव सप्रथस्तमेअग्ने|	under thine own most wide protection may we dwell let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
तत ते भद्रं यत समिद्धः सवे दमे सोमाहुतो जरसे मर्ळयत्तमः|	this is thy grace that kindled in thine own abode invoked with soma thou soundest forth most benign.
दधासि रत्नं दरविणं च दाशुषेअग्ने|	thou givest wealth and treasure to the worshipper let us not in thy friendship agni suffer harm.
यस्मै तवं सुद्रविणो ददाशोअनागास्त्वमदिते सर्वताता|	to whom thou lord of goodly riches grantest freedom from every sin with perfect wholeness.
यं भद्रेण शवसा चोदयासि परजावता राधसा ते सयाम|	whom with good strength thou quickenest with children and wealthmay we be they eternal being.
स तवमग्ने सौभगत्वस्य विद्वानस्माकमायुः पर तिरेहदेव|	such agni thou who knowest all good fortune god lengthen here the days of our existence.
तन नो मित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पर्थिवी उत दयौः|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
पर्थू रथो दक्षिणाया अयोज्यैनं देवासो अम्र्तासो अस्थुः|	the dakṣiṇās broad chariot hath been harnessed this car the gods immortal have ascended.
कर्ष्णादुदस्थादर्या विहायाश्चिकित्सन्ती मानुषायक्षयाय|	fain to bring light to homes of men the noble and active goddess hath emerged from darkness.
पूर्वा विश्वस्माद भुवनादबोधि जयन्ती वाजं बर्हती सनुत्री|	she before all the living world hath wakened the lofty one who wins and gathers treasure.
उच्चा वयख्यद युवतिः पुनर्भूरोषा अगन परथमा पूर्वहूतौ|	revived and ever young on high she glances dawn hath come first unto our morning worship.
यदद्य भागं विभजासि नर्भ्य उषो देवि मर्त्यत्रा सुजाते|	if dawn thou goddess nobly born thou dealest fortune this day to all the race of mortals.
देवो नो अत्र सविता दमूना अनागसो वोचति सूर्याय|	may savitar the god friend of the homestead declare before the sun that we are sinless.
गर्हंगर्हमहना यात्यछा दिवेदिवे अधि नामा दधाना|	showing her wonted form each day that passeth spreading the light she visiteth each dwelling.
सिषासन्ती दयोतना शश्वदागादग्रमअग्रमिद भजतेवसूनाम|	eager for conquest with bright sheen she cometh her portion is the best of goodly treasures.
भगस्य सवसा वरुणस्य जामिरुषः सून्र्ते परथमा जरस्व|	sister of varuṇa sister of bhaga first among all sing forth o joyous morning.
पश्चा स दघ्या यो अघस्य धाता जयेम तं दक्षिणया रथेन|	weak be the strength of him who worketh evil may we subdue him with our car the guerdon.
उदीरतां सून्र्ता उत पुरन्धीरुदग्नयः शुशुचानासोस्थुः|	let our glad hymns and holy thoughts rise upward for the flames brightly burning have ascended.
सपार्हा वसूनि तमसापगूळ्हाविष कर्ण्वन्त्युषसो विभातीः|	the farrefulgent mornings make apparent the lovely treasures which the darkness covered.
अपान्यदेत्यभ्यन्यदेति विषुरूपे अहनी सं चरेते|	the one departeth and the other cometh unlike in hue days halves march on successive.
परिक्षितोस्तमो अन्या गुहाकरद्यौदुषाः शोशुचता रथेन|	one hides the gloom of the surrounding parents dawn on her shining chariot is resplendent.
सद्र्शीरद्य सद्र्शीरिदु शवो दीर्घं सचन्ते वरुणस्यधाम|	the same in form today the same tomorrow they still keep varuṇas eternal statute.
अनवद्यास्त्रिंशतं योजनान्येकैका करतुं परियन्ति सद्यः|	blameless in turn they traverse thirty regions and dart across the spirit in a moment.
जानत्यह्नः परथमस्य नाम शुक्रा कर्ष्णादजनिष्ट शवितीची|	she who hath knowledge of the first days nature is born refulgent white from out the darkness.
रतस्य योषा न मिनाति धामाहर अहर्निष्क्र्तमाचरन्ती|	the maiden breaketh not the law of order day by day coming to the place appointed.
कन्येव तन्वा शाशदानानेषि देवि देवमियक्षमाणम|	in pride of beauty like a maid thou goest o goddess to the god who longs to win thee.
संस्मयमाना युवतिः पुरस्तादाविर्वक्षांसि कर्णुषे विभाती|	and smiling youthful as thou shinest brightly before him thou discoverest thy bosom.
सुसंकाशा मात्र्म्र्ष्टेव योषाविस्तन्वं कर्णुषे दर्शे कम|	fair as a bride embellished by her mother thou showest forth thy form that all may see it.
भद्रा तवमुषो वितरं वयुछ न तत ते अन्या उषसोनशन्त|	blessed art thou o dawn shine yet more widely no other dawns have reached what thou attainest.
अश्वावतीर्गोमतीर्विश्ववारा यतमाना रश्मिभिः सूर्यस्य|	rich in kine horses and all goodly treasures in constant operation with the sunbeams.
परा च यन्ति पुनरा च यन्ति भद्रा नाम वहमानाुषासः|	the dawns depart and come again assuming their wonted forms that promise happy fortune.
रतस्य रश्मिमनुयछमाना भद्रमभद्रं करतुमस्मासु धेहि|	obedient to the rein of law eternal give us each thought that more and more shall bless us.
उषो नो अद्य सुहवा वयुछास्मासु रायो मघवत्सु च सयुः|	shine thou on us today dawn swift to listen with us be riches and with chiefs who worship.
कथा दाशेमाग्नये कास्मै देवजुष्टोच्यते भामिने गीः|	how shall we pay oblation unto agni what hymn godloved is said to him refulgent.
यो मर्त्येष्वम्र्त रतावा होता यजिष्ठ इत कर्णोति देवान|	who deathless true to law mid men a herald bringeth the gods as best of sacrificers.
यो अध्वरेषु शन्तम रतावा होता तमू नमोभिरा कर्णुध्वम|	bring him with reverence hither most propitious in sacrifices true to law the herald.
अग्निर्यद वेर्मर्ताय देवान स चा बोधाति मनसायजाति|	for agni when he seeks the gods for mortals knows them full well and worships them in spirit.
स हि करतुः स मर्यः स साधुर्मित्रो न भूदद्भुतस्य रथीः|	for he is mental power a man and perfect he is the bringer friendlike of the wondrous.
तं मेधेषु परथमं देवयन्तीर्विश उप बरुवते दस्ममारीः|	the pious Āryan tribes at sacrifices address them first to him who doeth marvels.
स नो नर्णां नर्तमो रिशाद अग्निर्गिरोअवसा वेतु धीतिम|	may agni foedestroyer manliest hero accept with love our hymns and our devotion.
तना च ये मघवानः शविष्ठ वाजप्रसूता इषयन्तमन्म|	so may the liberal lords whose strength is strongest urged by their riches stir our thoughts with vigour.
एवाग्निर्गोतमेभिर्र्तावा विप्रेभिरस्तोष्ट जातवेदाः|	thus agni jātavedas true to order hath by the priestly gotamas been lauded.
स एषु दयुम्नं पीपयत स वाजं स पुष्टिं याति जोषमा चिकित्वान|	may he augment in them splendour and vigour observant as he lists he gathers increase.
आ तवा वहन्तु हरयो वर्षणं सोमपीतये|	let thy bay steeds bring thee the strong hither to drink the soma draught.
इन्द्र तवा सूरचक्षसः|	those indra who are bright as suns.
इमा धाना घर्तस्नुवो हरी इहोप वक्षतः|	here are the grains bedewed with oil hither let the bay coursers bring.
इन्द्रं सुखतमे रथे|	indra upon his easiest car.
इन्द्रं परातर्हवामह इन्द्रं परयत्यध्वरे|	indra at early morn we call indra in course of sacrifice.
इन्द्रं सोमस्य पीतये|	indra to drink the soma juice.
उप नः सुतमा गहि हरिभिरिन्द्र केशिभिः|	come hither with thy longmaned steeds o indra to he draught we pour.
सुते हि तवाहवामहे|	we call thee when the juice is shed.
सेमं न सतोमं आ गह्युपेदं सवनं सुतम|	come thou to this our song of praise to the libation poured for thee.
गौरो नत्र्षितः पिब|	drink of it like a stag athirst.
इमे सोमास इन्दवः सुतासो अधि बर्हिषि|	here are the drops of soma juice expressed on sacred grass thereof.
तानिन्द्र सहसेपिब|	drink indra to increase thy might.
अयं ते सतोमो अग्रियो हर्दिस्प्र्गस्तु शन्तमः|	welcome to thee be this our hymn reaching thy heart most excellent.
अथा सोमंसुतं पिब|	then drink the soma juice expressed.
विश्वमित सवनं सुतमिन्द्रो मदाय गछति|	to every draught of pressedout juice indra the vṛtraslayer comes.
वर्त्रहा सोमपीतये|	to drink the soma for delight.
सेमं नः काममा पर्ण गोभिरश्वैः शतक्रतो|	fulfil o Śatakratu all our wish with horses and with kine.
सतवाम तवा सवाध्यः|	with holy thoughts we sing thy praise.
सुषुमा यातमद्रिभिर्गोश्रीता मत्सरा इमे सोमासो मत्सरा इमे|	with stones have we pressed out o come these gladdening drops are blent with milk these somadrops which gladden you.
आ राजाना दिविस्प्र्शास्मत्रा गन्तमुप नः|	come to us kings who reach to heaven approach us coming hitherward.
इमे वां मित्रावरुणा गवाशिरः सोमाः शुक्रा गवाशिरः|	these milky drops are yours mitra and varuṇa bright soma juices blent with milk.
इम आ यातम इन्दवः सोमासो दध्याशिरः सुतासो दध्याशिरः|	here are the droppings come ye nigh the somadroppings blent with curd juices expressed and blent with curd.
उत वाम उषसो बुधि साकं सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिः|	now for the wakening of your dawn together with the sungods rays.
सुतो मित्राय वरुणाय पीतये चारुर रताय पीतये|	juice waits for mitra and for varuṇa to drink fair juice for drink for sacrifice.
तां वां धेनुं न वासरीम अंशुं दुहन्त्य अद्रिभिः सोमं दुहन्त्य अद्रिभिः|	as twere a radiantcoloured cow they milk with stones the stalk for you with stones they milk the somaplant.
अस्मत्रा गन्तम उप नो ऽरवाञ्चा सोमपीतये|	may ye come nigh us may ye turn hither to drink the soma juice.
अयं वाम मित्रावरुणा नर्भिः सुतः सोम आ पीतये सुतः|	the men pressed out this juice mitra and varuṇa pressed out this soma for your drink.
परातर्युजा वि बोधयाश्विनावेह गछताम|	waken the aśvin pair who yoke their car at early morn may they.
अस्य सोमस्य पीतये|	approach to drink this soma juice.
या सुरथा रथीतमोभा देवा दिविस्प्र्शा|	we call the aśvins twain the gods borne in a noble car the best.
अश्विना ता हवामहे|	of charioteers who reach the heavens.
या वां कशा मधुमत्यश्विना सून्र्तावती|	dropping with honey is your whip aśvins and full of pleasantness.
तया यज्ञं मिमिक्षतम|	sprinkle therewith the sacrifice.
नहि वामस्ति दूरके यत्रा रथेन गछथः|	as ye go thither in your car not far o aśvins is the home.
अश्विना सोमिनो गर्हम|	of him who offers soma juice.
हिरण्यपाणिमूतये सवितारमुप हवये|	for my protection i invoke the goldenhanded savitar.
स चेत्ता देवतापदम|	he knoweth as a god the place.
अपां नपातमवसे सवितारमुप सतुहि|	that he may send us succour praise the waters offspring savitar.
तस्य वरतान्युश्मसि|	fain are we for his holy ways.
विभक्तारं हवामहे वसोश्चित्रस्य राधसः|	we call on him distributer of wondrous bounty and of wealth.
सवितारंन्र्चक्षसम|	on savitar who looks on men.
सखाय आ नि षीदत सविता सतोम्यो नु नः|	come hither friends and seat yourselves savitar to be praised by us.
दाता राधांसि शुम्भति|	giving good gifts is beautiful.
अग्ने पत्नीरिहा वह देवानामुशतीरुप|	o agni hither bring to us the willing spouses of the gods.
तवष्टारं सोमपीतये|	and tvaṣṭar to the soma draught.
आ गना अग्न इहावसे होत्रां यविष्ठ भारतीम|	most youthful agni hither bring their spouses hotrā bhāratī.
वरूत्रीं धिषणां वह|	varūtrī dhiṣaṇā for aid.
अभी नो देवीरवसा महः शर्मणा नर्पत्नीः|	spouses of heroes goddesses with whole wings may they come to us.
अछिन्नपत्राः सचन्ताम|	with great protection and with aid.
इहेन्द्राणीमुप हवये वरुणानीं सवस्तये|	indrāṇī varuṇānī and agnāyī hither i invite.
अग्नायीं सोमपीतये|	for weal to drink the soma juice.
मही दयौः पर्थिवी च न इमं यज्ञं मिमिक्षताम|	may heaven and earth the mighty pair bedew for us our sacrifice.
पिप्र्तां नो भरीमभिः|	and feed us full with nourishments.
तयोरिद घर्तवत पयो विप्रा रिहन्ति धीतिभिः|	their water rich with fatness there in the gandharvas steadfast place.
गन्धर्वस्य धरुवे पदे|	the singers taste through sacred songs.
सयोना पर्थिवि भवान्र्क्षरा निवेशनी|	thornless be thou o earth spread wide before us for a dwellingplace.
यछा नः शर्म सप्रथः|	vouchsafe us shelter broad and sure.
अतो देवा अवन्तु नो यतो विष्णुर्विचक्रमे|	the gods be gracious unto us even from the place whence viṣṇu strode.
पर्थिव्याः सप्तधामभिः|	through the seven regions of the earth.
इदं विष्णुर्वि चक्रमे तरेधा नि दधे पदम|	through all this world strode viṣṇu thrice his foot he planted and the whole.
समूळ्हमस्य पांसुरे|	was gathered in his footsteps dust.
तरीणि पदा वि चक्रमे विष्णुर्गोपा अदाभ्यः|	viṣṇu the guardian he whom none deceiveth made three steps thenceforth.
अतो धर्माणि धारयन|	establishing his high decrees.
विष्णोः कर्माणि पश्यत यतो वरतानि पस्पशे|	look ye on viṣṇus works whereby the friend of indra closeallied.
इन्द्रस्य युज्यः सखा|	hath let his holy ways be seen.
तद विष्णोः परमं पदं सदा पश्यन्ति सूरयः|	the princes evermore behold that loftiest place where viṣṇu is.
दिवीव चक्षुराततम|	laid as it were an eye in heaven.
तद विप्रासो विपन्यवो जाग्र्वांसः समिन्धते|	this viṣṇus station most sublime the singers ever vigilant.
विष्णोर्यत परमं पदम|	lovers of holy song light up.
युवं वस्त्रणि पुवसा वसाथे युवोरछिद्रा मन्तवो ह सर्गाः|	the robes which ye put on abound with fatness uninterrupted courses are your counsels.
अवातिरतमन्र्तानि विश्व रतेन मित्रावरुणा सचेथे|	all falsehood mitravaruṇa ye conquer and closely cleave unto the law eternal.
एतच्चन तवो वि चिकेतदेषां सत्यो मन्त्रः कविशस्त रघावान|	this might of theirs hath no one comprehended true is the crushing word the sage hath uttered.
तरिरश्रिं हन्ति चतुरश्रिरुग्रो देवनिदो ह परथमाजूर्यन|	the fearful fouredged bolt smites down the threeedged and those who hate the gods first fall and perish.
अपादेति परथमा पद्वतीनां कस्तद वां मित्रावरुणा चिकेत|	the footless maid precedeth footed creatures who marketh mitravaruṇa this your doing.
गर्भो भारं भरत्या चिदस्य रतं पिपर्त्यन्र्तं नि तारीत|	the babe unborn supporteth this worlds burthen fulfilleth law and overcometh falsehood.
परयन्तमित परि जारं कनीनां पश्यामसि नोपनिपद्यमानम|	we look on him the darling of the maidens always advancing never falling downward.
अनवप्र्ग्णा वितता वसानं परियं मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धाम|	wearing inseparable widespread raiment mitras and varuṇas delightful glory.
अनश्वो जातो अनभीशुरर्वा कनिक्रदत पतयदूर्ध्वसानुः|	unbridled courser born but not of horses neighing he flieth on with back uplifted.
अचित्तं बरह्म जुजुषुर्युवानः पर मित्रे धाम वरुणेग्र्णन्तः|	the youthful love mystery thoughtsurpassing praising in mitravaruṇa its glory.
आ धेनवो मामतेयमवन्तीर्ब्रह्मप्रियं पीपयन सस्मिन्नूधन|	may the milchkine who favour māmateya prosper in this world him who loves devotion.
पित्वो भिक्षेत वयुनानि विद्वानासाविवासन्नदितिमुरुष्येत|	may he well skilled in rites be food and calling aditi with his lips give us assistance.
आ वां मित्रावरुणा हव्यजुष्टिं नमसा देवाववसा वव्र्त्याम|	gods mitravaruṇa with love and worship let me make you delight in this oblation.
अस्माकं बरह्म पर्तनासु सह्या अस्माकं वर्ष्टिर्दिव्यासुपारा|	may our prayer be victorious in battles may we have rain from heaven to make us prosper.
इहेन्द्राग्नी उप हवये तयोरित सतोममुश्मसि|	indra and agni i invoke fain are we for their song of praise.
ता सोमं सोमपातमा|	chief somadrinkers are they both.
ता यज्ञेषु पर शंसतेन्द्राग्नी शुम्भता नरः|	praise ye o men and glorify indraagni in the holy rites.
ता गायत्रेषु गायत|	sing praise to them in sacred songs.
ता मित्रस्य परशस्तय इन्द्राग्नी ता हवामहे|	indra and agni we invite the somadrinkers for the fame.
सोमपा सोमपीतये|	of mitra to the somadraught.
उग्रा सन्ता हवामह उपेदं सवनं सुतम|	strong gods we bid them come to this libation that stands ready here.
इन्द्राग्नी एह गछताम|	indra and agni come to us.
ता महान्ता सदस्पती इन्द्राग्नी रक्ष उब्जतम|	indra and agni mighty lords of our assembly crush the fiends.
अप्रजाःसन्त्वत्रिणः|	childless be the devouring ones.
तेन सत्येन जाग्र्तमधि परचेतुने पदे|	watch ye through this your truthfulness there in the place of spacious view.
इन्द्राग्नी शर्म यछतम|	indra and agni send us bliss.
ईळे दयावाप्र्थिवी पूर्वचित्तयेअग्निं घर्मं सुरुचं यामन्निष्टये|	to give first thought to them i worship heaven and earth and agni fair bright glow to hasten their approach.
याभिर्भरे कारमंशाय जिन्वथस्ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना गतम|	come hither unto us o aśvins with those aids wherewith in fight ye speed the warcry to the spoil.
युवोर्दानाय सुभरा असश्चतो रथमा तस्थुर्वचसं न मन्तवे|	ample unfailing they have mounted as it were an eloquent car that ye may think of us and give.
याभिर्धियोअवथःकर्मन्निष्टये ताभिर|	come hither unto us o aśvins with those aids wherewith ye help our thoughts to further holy acts.
युवं तासां दिव्यस्य परशासने विशां कषयथो अम्र्तस्यमज्मना|	ye by the might which heavenly nectar giveth you are in supreme dominion lords of all these folk.
याभिर्धेनुमस्वं पिन्वथो नरा ताभिर|	come hither unto us o aśvins with those aids wherewith ye heroes made the barren cow give milk.
याभिः परिज्मा तनयस्य मज्मना दविमाता तूर्षु तरणिर्विभूषति|	the aids wherewith the wanderer through his offsprings might or the twomothered son shows swiftest mid the swift.
याभिस्त्रिमन्तुरभवद विचक्षणस्ताभिर|	wherewith the sapient one acquired his triple lorecome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभी रेभं निव्र्तं सितमद्भ्य उद वन्दनमैरयतं सवर्द्र्शे|	wherewith ye raised from waters prisoned and fast bound rebha and vandana to look upon the light.
याभिः कण्वं पर सिषासन्तमावतं ताभिर|	wherewith ye succoured kaṇva as he strove to wincome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिरन्तकं जसमानमारणे भुज्यं याभिरव्यथिभिर्जिजिन्वथुः|	wherewith ye rescued antaka when languishing deep in the pit and bhujyu with unfailing help.
याभिः कर्कन्धुं वय्यं च जिन्वथस्ताभिर|	and comforted karkandhu vayya in their woecome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः शुचन्तिं धनसां सुषंसदं तप्तं घर्ममोम्यावन्तमत्रये|	wherewith ye gave Śucanti wealth and happy home and made the fiery pit friendly for atris sake.
याभिः पर्ष्निगुं पुरुकुत्समावतं ताभिर|	wherewith ye guarded purukutsa pṛśnigucome hither unto us o aśvin with those aids.
याभिः शचीभिर्व्र्षणा पराव्र्जं परान्धं शरोणं चक्षस एतवे कर्थः|	mighty ones with what powers ye gave parāvṛj aid what time ye made the blind and lame to see and walk.
याभिर्वर्तिकां गरसिताममुञ्चतन्ताभिर|	wherewith ye set at liberty the swallowed quailcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः सिन्धुं मधुमन्तमसश्चतं वसिष्ठं याभिरजरावजिन्वतम|	wherewith ye quickened the most sweet exhaustless flood and comforted vasiṣṭha ye who neer decay.
याभिः कुत्सं शरुतर्यं नर्यमावतं ताभिर|	and to Śrutarya kutsa narya gave your helpcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिर्विश्पलां धनसामथर्व्यं सहस्रमीळ्ह आजावजिन्वतम|	wherewith ye helped in battle of a thousand spoils viśpalā seeking booty powerless to move.
याभिर्वशमश्व्यं परेणिमावतं ताभिर|	wherewith ye guarded friendly vaśa aśvas soncome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः सुदानू औशिजाय वणिजे दीर्घश्रवसे मधु कोशोक्षरत|	whereby the cloud ye bounteous givers shed sweet rain for dīrghaśravas for the merchant auśija.
कक्षीवन्तं सतोतारं याभिरावतं ताभिर|	wherewith ye helped kakṣīvān singer of your praisecome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभी रसां कषोदसोद्नः पिपिन्वथुरनश्वं याभी रथमावतं जिषे|	wherewith ye made rasā swell full with waterfloods and urged to victory the car without a horse.
याभिस्त्रिशोक उस्रिया उदाजत ताभिर|	wherewith triśoka drove forth his recovered cowscome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः सूर्यं परियाथः परावति मन्धातारं कषैत्रपत्येष्वावतम|	wherewith ye compass round the sun when far away strengthened mandhātar in his tasks as lord of lands.
याभिर्विप्रं पर भरद्वाजमावतं ताभिर|	and to sage bharadvāja gave protecting helpcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिर्महामतिथिग्वं कशोजुवं दिवोदासं शम्बरहत्यावतम|	wherewith when Śambara was slain ye guarded well great atithigva divodāsa kaśoju.
याभिः पूर्भिद्ये तरसदस्युमावतं ताभिर|	and trasadasyu when the forts were shattered downcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिर्वम्रं विपिपानमुपस्तुतं कलिं याभिर्वित्तजानिं दुवस्यथः|	wherewith ye honoured the great drinker vamra and upastuta and kali when he gained his wife.
याभिर्व्यश्वमुत पर्थिमावतं ताभिर|	and lent to vyaśva and to pṛthi favouring helpcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिर्नरा शयवे याभिरत्रये याभिः पुरा मनवे गातुमीषथुः|	wherewith o heroes ye vouchsafed deliverance to Śayu atri and to manu long ago.
याभिः शारीराजतं सयूमरश्मये ताभिर|	wherewith ye shot your shafts in syūmaraśmis causecome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः पठर्वा जठरस्य मज्मनाग्निर्नादीदेच्चित इद्धो अज्मन्ना|	wherewith paṭharvā in his majesty of form shone in his course like to a gathered kindled fire.
याभिः शर्यातमवथो महाधने ताभिर|	wherewith ye helped Śāryāta in the mighty fraycome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिरङगिरो मनसा निरण्यथोअग्रं गछथो विवरे गोर्णसः|	wherewith aṅgirases ye triumphed in your heart and onward went to liberate the flood of milk.
याभिर्मनुं शूरमिषा समावतं ताभिर|	wherewith ye helped the hero manu with new strengthcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः पत्नीर्विमदाय नयूहथुरा घ वा याभिररुणीरशिक्षतम|	wherewith ye brought a wife for vimada to wed wherewith ye freely gave the ruddy cows away.
याभिः सुदास ऊहथुः सुदेव्यं ताभिर|	wherewith ye brought the host of kind gods to sudāscome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः शन्ताती भवथो ददाशुषे भुज्युं याभिरवथो याभिरध्रिगुम|	wherewith ye bring great bliss to him who offers gifts wherewith ye have protected bhujyu adhrigu.
ओम्यावतीं सुभरां रतस्तुभं ताभिर|	and good and gracious subharā and Ṛtastupcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः कर्शानुमसने दुवस्यथो जवे याभिर्यूनो अर्वन्तमावतम|	wherewith ye served kṛśānu where the shafts were shot and helped the young mans horse to swiftness in the race.
मधु परियं भरथो यत सरड्भ्यस्ताभिर|	wherewith ye bring delicious honey to the beescome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिर्नरं गोषुयुधं नर्षाह्ये कषेत्रस्य साता तनयस्य जिन्वथः|	wherewith ye speed the hero as he fights for kine in hero battle in the strife for land and sons.
याभी रथानवथो याभिरर्वतस्ताभिर|	wherewith ye safely guard his horses and his carcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
याभिः कुत्समार्जुनेयं शतक्रतू पर तुर्वीतिं पर च दभीतिमावतम|	wherewith ye lords of hundred powers helped kutsa son of Ārjuni gave turvīti and dabhīti strength.
याभिर्ध्वसन्तिं पुरुषन्तिमावतं ताभिर|	favoured dhvasanti and lent puruṣanti helpcome hither unto us o aśvins with those aids.
अप्नस्वतीमश्विना वाचमस्मे कर्तं नो दस्रा वर्षणा मनीषाम|	make ye our speech effectual o ye aśvins and this our hymn ye mighty wonderworkers.
अद्यूत्येअवसे नि हवये वां वर्धे च नो भवतं वाजसातौ|	in luckless game i call on you for succour strengthen us also on the field of battle.
दयुभिरक्तुभिः परि पातमस्मानरिष्टेभिरश्विना सौभगेभिः|	with undiminished blessings o ye aśvins for evermore both night and day protect us.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
वनेषु जायुर्मर्तेषु मित्रो वर्णीते शरुष्टिं राजेवाजुर्यम|	victorious in the wood friend among men ever he claims obedience as a king.
कषेमो न साधुः करतुर्न भद्रो भुवत सवाधिर्होता हव्यवाट|	gracious like peace blessing like mental power priest was he offeringbearer full of thought.
हस्ते दधानो नर्म्णा विश्वान्यमे देवान धाद गुहा निषीदन|	he bearing in his hand all manly might crouched in the cavern struck the gods with fear.
विदन्तीमत्र नरो धियन्धा हर्दा यत तष्टान मन्त्रानशंसन|	men filled with understanding find him there when they have sting prayers formed within their heart.
अजो न कषां दाधार पर्थिवीं तस्तम्भ दयां मन्त्रेभिः सत्यैः|	he like the unborn holds the broad earth up and with effective utterance fixed the sky.
परिया पदानि पश्वो नि पाहि विश्वायुरग्ने गुहा गुहं गाः|	o agni guard the spots which cattle love thou life of all hast gone from lair to lair.
य ईं चिकेत गुहा भवन्तमा यः ससाद धारां रतस्य|	whoso hath known him dwelling in his lair and hath approached the stream of holy law.
वि ये चर्तन्त्य रता सपन्त आदिद वसूनि पर ववाचास्मै|	they who release him paying sacred ritestruly to such doth he announce great wealth.
वि यो वीरुत्सु रोधन महित्वोत परजा उत परसूष्वन्तः|	he who grows mightily in herbs within each fruitful mother and each babe she bears.
चित्तिरपां दमे विश्वायुः सद्मेव धीराः सम्माय चक्रुः|	wise life of all men in the waters homefor him have sages built as twere a seat.
पर वः पान्तं रघुमन्यवोअन्धो यज्ञं रुद्राय मीळ्हुषे भरद्वम|	say bringing sacrifice to bounteous rudra this juice for drink to you whose wrath is fleeting.
दिवो अस्तोष्यसुरस्य वीरैरिषुध्येव मरुतो रोदस्योः|	with dyaus the asuras heroes i have lauded the maruts as with prayer to earth and heaven.
पत्नीव पूर्वहूतिं वाव्र्धध्या उषासानक्ता पुरुधा विदाने|	strong to exalt the early invocation are night and dawn who show with varied aspect.
सतरीर नात्कं वयुतं वसाना सूर्यस्य शरिया सुद्र्शी हिरण्यैः|	the barren clothes her in widewoven raiment and fair morn shines with sūryas golden splendour.
ममत्तु नः परिज्मा वसर्हा ममत्तु वातो अपां वर्षण्वान|	cheer us the roamer round who strikes at morning the wind delight us pourer forth of waters.
शिशीतमिन्द्रापर्वता युवं नस्तन नो विश्वे वरिवस्यन्तुदेवाः|	sharpen our wits o parvata and indra may all the gods vouchsafe to us this favour.
उत तया मे यशसा शवेतनायै वयन्ता पान्तौशिजो हुवध्यै|	and auśija shall call for me that famous pair who enjoy and drink who come to brighten.
पर वो नपातमपां कर्णुध्वं पर मातरा रास्पिनस्यायोः|	set ye the offspring of the floods before you both mothers of the living one who beameth.
आ वो रुवण्युमौशिजो हुवध्यै घोषेव शंसमर्जुनस्य नंशे|	for you shall auśija call him who thunders as to win arjunas assent cried ghoṣā.
पर वः पूष्णे दावन आनछा वोचेय वसुतातिमग्नेः|	i will invoke that pūṣan may be bounteous to you the rich munificence of agni.
शरुतं मे मित्रावरुणा हवेमोत शरुतं सदने विश्वतः सीम|	hear mitravaruṇa these mine invocations hear them from all men in the hall of worship.
शरोतु नः शरोतुरातिः सुश्रोतुः सुक्षेत्रा सिन्धुरद्भिः|	giver of famous gifts kind hearer sindhu who gives fair fields listen with all his waters.
सतुषे सा वां वरुण मित्र रातिर्गवां शता पर्क्षयामेषु पज्रे|	praised mitra varuṇa is your gift a hundred cows to the pṛkṣayāmas and the pajra.
शरुतरथे परियरथे दधानाः सद्यः पुष्टिंनिरुन्धानासो अग्मन|	presented by carfamous priyaratha supplying nourishment they came directly.
अस्य सतुषे महिमघस्य राधः सचा सनेम नहुषः सुवीराः|	praised is the gift of him the very wealthy may we enjoy it men with hero children.
जनो यः पज्रेभ्यो वाजिनीवानश्वावतो रथिनो मह्यं सूरिः|	his who hath many gifts to give the pajras a chief who makes me rich in cars and horses.
जनो यो मित्रावरुणावभिध्रुगपो न वां सुनोत्यक्ष्णयाध्रुक|	the folk o mitravaruṇa who hate you who sinfully hating pour you no libations.
सवयं स यक्ष्मं हर्दये नि धत्त आप यदीं होत्राभिर्र्तावा|	lay in their hearts themselves a wasting sickness whereas the righteous gaineth all by worship.
स वराधतो नहुषो दंसुजूतः शर्धस्तरो नरां गूर्तश्रवाः|	that man most puissant wondrously urged onward famed among heroes liberal in giving.
विस्र्ष्टरातिर्याति बाळ्हस्र्त्वा विश्वासु पर्त्सु सदमिच्छूरः|	moveth a warrior evermore undaunted in all encounters even with the mighty.
अध गमन्ता नहुषो हवं सूरेः शरोता राजानो अम्र्तस्य मन्द्राः|	come to the mans the sacrificers calling hear kings of immortality joygivers.
नभोजुवो यन निरवस्य राधः परशस्तये महिनारथवते|	while ye who speed through clouds decree your bounty largely for fame to him the chariot rider.
एतं शर्धं धाम यस्य सूरेरित्यवोचन दशतयस्य नंशे|	vigour will we bestow on that adorer whose tenfold draught we come to taste so spake they.
दयुम्नानि येषु वसुताती रारन विश्वे सन्वन्तु परभ्र्थेषु वाजम|	may all in whom rest splendour and great riches obtain refreshment in these sacrifices.
मन्दामहे दशतयस्य धासेर्द्विर्यत पञ्च बिभ्रतो यन्त्यन्ना|	we will rejoice to drink the tenfold present when the twicefive come bearing sacred viands.
किमिष्टाश्व इष्टरश्मिरेत ईशानासस्तरुषर्ञ्जते नॄन|	what can he do whose steeds and reins are choicest these the allpotent urge brave men to conquest.
हिरण्यकर्णं मणिग्रीवमर्णस्तन नो विश्वे वरिवस्यन्तु देवाः|	the sea and all the deities shall give us him with the golden ear and neck bejewelled.
अर्यो गिरः सद्य आ जग्मुषीरोस्राश्चाकन्तूभयेष्वस्मे|	dawns hasting to the praises of the pious be pleased with us both offerers and singers.
चत्वारो मा मशर्शारस्य शिश्वस्त्रयो राज्ञ आयवसस्यजिष्णोः|	four youthful sons of maśarśāra vex me three of the king the conquering ayavasa.
रथो वां मित्रावरुणा दीर्घापसाः सयूमगभस्तिः सूरो नाद्यौत|	now like the sun o varuṇa and mitra your car hath shone longshaped and reined with splendour.
एतायामोप गव्यन्त इन्द्रमस्माकं सु परमतिं वाव्र्धाति|	come fain for booty let us seek to indra yet more shall he increase his care that guides us.
अनाम्र्णः कुविदादस्य रायो गवां केतं परमावर्जते नः|	will not the indestructible endow us with perfect knowledge of this wealth of cattle.
उपेदहं धनदामप्रतीतं जुष्टं न शयेनो वसतिम्पतामि|	i fly to him invisible wealthgiver as flies the falcon to his cherished eyrie.
इन्द्रं नमस्यन्नुपमेभिरर्कैर्यः सतोत्र्भ्यो हव्यो अस्ति यामन|	with fairest hymns of praise adoring indra whom those who laud him must invoke in battle.
नि सर्वसेन इषुधीन्रसक्त समर्यो गा अजति यस्य वष्टि|	mid all his host he bindeth on the quiver he driveth cattle from what foe he pleaseth.
चोष्कूयमाण इन्द्र भूरि वामं मा पणिर्भूरस्मदधि परव्र्द्ध|	gathering up great store of riches indra be thou no trafficker with us most mighty.
वधीर्हि दस्युं धनिनं घनेननेकश्चरन्नुपशाकेभिरिन्द्र|	thou slewest with thy bolt the wealthy dasyu alone yet going with thy helpers indra.
धनोरधि विषुणक ते वयायन्नयज्वनः सनकाः परेतिमीयुः|	far from the floor of heaven in all directions the ancient riteless ones fled to destruction.
परा चिच्छीर्षा वव्र्जुस्त इन्द्रायज्वानो यज्वभिः सपर्धमानाः|	fighting with pious worshippers the riteless turned and fled indra with averted faces.
पर यद दिवो हरिव सथातरुग्र निरव्रतानधमोरोदस्योः|	when thou fierce lord of the bay steeds the stayer blewest from earth and heaven and sky the godless.
अयुयुत्सन्ननवद्यस्य सेनामयातयन्त कषितयो नवग्वाः|	they met in fight the army of the blameless then the navagvas put forth all their power.
वर्षायुधो न वध्रयो निरष्टाः परवद्भिरिन्द्राच्चितयन्त आयन|	they like emasculates with men contending fled conscious by steep paths from indra scattered.
तवमेतान रुदतो जक्षतश्चायोधयो रजस इन्द्र पारे|	whether they weep or laugh thou hast oerthrown them o indra on the skys extremest limit.
अवादहो दिव आ दस्युमुच्चा पर सुन्वतः सतुवतः शंसमावः|	the dasyu thou hast burned from heaven and welcomed the prayer of him who pours the juice and lauds thee.
चक्राणासः परीणहं पर्थिव्या हिरण्येन मणिना शुम्भमानाः|	adorned with their array of gold and jewels they oer the earth a covering veil extended.
न हिन्वानासस्तितिरुस्त इन्द्रं परि सपशो अदधात सूर्येण|	although they hastened they oercame not indra their spies he compassed with the sun of morning.
परि यदिन्द्र रोदसी उभे अबुभोजीर्महिना विश्वतः सीम|	as thou enjoyest heaven and earth o indra on every side surrounded with thy greatness.
अमन्यमानानभि मन्यमानैर्निर्ब्रह्मभिरधमो दस्युमिन्द्र|	so thou with priests hast blown away the dasyu and those who worship not with those who worship.
न ये दिवः पर्थिव्या अन्तमापुर्न मायाभिर्धनदां पर्यभूवन|	they who pervaded earths extremest limit subdued not with their charms the wealthbestower.
युजं वज्रं वर्षभश्चक्र इन्द्रो निर्ज्योतिषा तमसो गा अदुक्षत|	indra the bull made his ally the thunder and with its light milked cows from out the darkness.
अनु सवधामक्षरन्नापो अस्यावर्धत मध्य आ नाव्यानाम|	the waters flowed according to their nature he raid the navigable streams waxed mighty.
सध्रीचीनेन मनसा तमिन्द्र ओजिष्ठेन हन्मनाहन्नभि दयून|	then indra with his spirit concentrated smote him for ever with his strongest weapon.
नयाविध्यदिलीबिशस्य दर्ल्हा वि शर्ङगिणमभिनच्छुष्णमिन्द्रः|	indra broke through ilībiśas strong castles and Śuṣṇa with his horn he cut to pieces.
यावत तरो मघवन यावदोजो वज्रेण शत्रुमवधीः पर्तन्युम|	thou maghavan for all his might and swiftness slewest thy fighting foeman with thy thunder.
अभि सिध्मो अजिगादस्य शत्रून वि तिग्मेन वर्षभेण पुरोअभेत|	fierce on his enemies fell indras weapon with his sharp bull he rent their forts in pieces.
सं वज्रेणास्र्जद वर्त्रमिन्द्रः पर सवां मतिमतिरच्छाशदानः|	he with his thunderbolt dealt blows on vṛtra and conquered executing all his purpose.
आवः कुत्सम इन्द्र यस्मि चाकन परावो युध्यन्तं वर्षभं दशद्युम|	indra thou helpest kutsa whom thou lovedst and guardedst brave daśadyu when he battled.
शफच्युतो रेणुर नक्षत दयाम उच छवैत्रेयो नर्षाह्याय तस्थौ|	the dust of trampling horses rose to heaven and Śvitrās son stood up again for conquest.
आवः शमं वर्षभं तुग्र्यासु कषेत्रजेषे मघवञ्छ्वित्र्यं गाम|	Śvitrās mild steer o maghavan thou helpest in combat for the land mid tugras houses.
जयोक चिद अत्र तस्थिवांसो अक्रञ्छत्रूयताम अधरा वेदनाकः|	long stood they there before the task was ended thou wast the master of the foemens treasure.
इन्द्र सोमं पिब रतुना तवा विशन्त्विन्दवः|	o indra drink the soma juice with Ṛtu let the cheering drops.
मत्सरासस्तदोकसः|	sink deep within which settle there.
मरुतः पिबत रतुना पोत्राद यज्ञं पुनीतन|	drink from the purifiers cup maruts with Ṛtu sanctify.
यूयं हि षठा सुदानवः|	the rite for ye give precious gifts.
अभि यज्ञं गर्णीहि नो गनावो नेष्टः पिब रतुना|	o neṣṭar with thy dame accept our sacrifice with Ṛtu drink.
तवंहि रत्नधा असि|	for thou art he who giveth wealth.
अग्ने देवानिहा वह सादया योनिषु तरिषु|	bring the gods agni in the three appointed places set them down.
परि भूष पिब रतुना|	surround them and with Ṛtu drink.
बराह्मणादिन्द्र राधसः पिबा सोमं रतून्रनु|	drink soma after the Ṛtus from the brāhmaṇas bounty undissolved.
तवेद धि सख्यमस्त्र्तम|	o indra is thy friendships bond.
युवं दक्षं धर्तव्रत मित्रावरुण दूळभम|	mitra varuṇa ye whose ways are firma power that none deceives.
रतुना यज्ञमाशाथे|	with Ṛtu ye have reached the rite.
दरविणोदा दरविणसो गरावहस्तासो अध्वरे|	the somapressers fain for wealth praise the wealthgiver in the rite.
यज्ञेषु देवमीळते|	in sacrifices praise the god.
दरविणोदा ददातु नो वसूनि यानि शर्ण्विरे|	may the wealthgiver grant to us riches that shall be far renowned.
देवेषु ता वनामहे|	these things we gain among the gods.
दरविणोदाः पिपीषति जुहोत पर च तिष्ठत|	he with the Ṛtu fain would drink wealthgiver from the neṣṭars bowl.
नेष्ट्राद रतुभिरिष्यत|	haste give your offering and depart.
यत तवा तुरीयं रतुभिर्द्रविणोदो यजामहे|	as we this fourth time wealthgiver honour thee with the Ṛtus be.
अध समा नो ददिर्भव|	a giver bountiful to us.
अश्विना पिबतं मधु दीद्यग्नी शुचिव्रत|	drink ye the meath o aśvins bright with flames whose acts are pure who with.
रतुना यज्ञवाहसा|	Ṛtus accept the sacrifice.
गार्हपत्येन सन्त्य रतुना यज्ञनीरसि|	with Ṛtu through the housefire thou kind giver guidest sacrifice.
देवान देवयते यज|	worship the gods for the pious man.
पराता रत्नं परातरित्वा दधाति तं चिकित्वान परतिग्र्ह्यानि धत्ते|	coming at early morn he gives his treasure the prudent one receives and entertains him.
तेन परजां वर्धयमान आयू रायस पोषेण सचते सुवीरः|	thereby increasing still his life and offspring he comes with brave sons to abundant riches.
सुगुरसत सुहिरण्यः सवश्वो बर्हदस्मै वय इन्द्रो दधाति|	rich shall he be in gold and kine and horses indra bestows on him great vital power.
यस्त्वायन्तं वसुना परातरित्वो मुक्षीजयेव पदिमुत्सिनाति|	who stays thee as thou comest with his treasure like game caught in the net o early comer.
आयमद्य सुक्र्तं परातरिछन्निष्टेः पुत्रं वसुमता रथेन|	longing i came this morning to the pious the son of sacrifice with car wealthladen.
अंशोः सुतं पायय मत्सरस्य कषयद्वीरं वर्धय सून्र्ताभिः|	give him to drink juice of the stalk that gladdens prosper with pleasant hymns the lord of heroes.
उप कषरन्ति सिन्धवो मयोभुव ईजानं च यक्ष्यमाणं चधेनवः|	healthbringing streams as milchcows flow to profit him who hath worshipped him who now will worship.
पर्णन्तं च पपुरिं च शरवस्यवो घर्तस्य धारा उप यन्ति विश्वतः|	to him who freely gives and fills on all sides full streams of fatness flow and make him famous.
नाकस्य पर्ष्ठे अधि तिष्ठति शरितो यः पर्णाति स ह देवेषु गछति|	on the high ridge of heaven he stands exalted yea to the gods he goes the liberal giver.
तस्मा आपो घर्तमर्षन्ति सिन्धवस्तस्मा इयं दक्षिणा पिन्वते सदा|	the streams the waters flow for him with fatness to him this guerdon ever yields abundance.
दक्षिणावतामिदिमानि चित्रा दक्षिणावतां दिवि सूर्यासः|	for those who give rich meeds are all these splendours for those who give rich meeds suns shine in heaven.
दक्षिणावन्तो अम्र्तं भजन्ते दक्षिणावन्तः पर तिरन्त आयुः|	the givers of rich meeds are made immortal the givers of rich fees prolong their lifetime.
मा पर्णन्तो दुरितमेन आरन मा जारिषुः सूरयः सुव्रतासः|	let not the liberal sink to sin and sorrow never decay the pious chiefs who worship.
अन्यस्तेषां परिधिरस्तु कश्चिदप्र्णन्तमभि सं यन्तु शोकाः|	let every man besides be their protection and let affliction fall upon the niggard.
परपर पूष्णस तुविजातस्य शस्यते महित्वम अस्य तवसो न तन्दते सतोत्रम अस्य न तन्दते|	strong pūṣans majesty is lauded evermore the glory of his lordly might is never faint his song of praise is never faint.
अर्चामि सुम्नयन्न अहम अन्त्यूतिम मयोभुवम|	seeking felicity i laud him nigh to help the source of bliss.
विश्वस्य यो मन आयुयुवे मखो देव आयुयुवे मखः|	who vigorous one hath drawn to him the hearts of all drawn them the vigorous one the god.
पर हि तवा पूषन्न अजिरं न यामनि सतोमेभिः कर्ण्व रणवो यथा मर्ध उष्ट्रो न पीपरो मर्धः|	thee then o pūṣan like a swift one on his way i urge with lauds that thou mayst make the foemen flee drive camellike our foes afar.
हुवे यत तवा मयोभुवं देवं सख्याय मर्त्यः|	as i a man call thee a god giver of bliss to be my friend.
अस्माकम आङगूषान दयुम्निनस कर्धि वाजेषु दयुम्निनस कर्धि|	so make our loudlychanted praises glorious in battles make them glorious.
यस्य ते पूषन सख्ये विपन्यवः करत्वा चित सन्तो ऽवसा बुभुज्रिर इति करत्वा बुभुज्रिरे|	thou pūṣan in whose friendship they who sing forth praise enjoy advantage even in wisdom through thy grace in wisdom even they are advanced.
ताम अनु तवा नवीयसीं नियुतं राय ईमहे|	so after this most recent course we come to thee with prayers for wealth.
अहेळमान उरुशंस सरी भव वाजेवाजे सरी भव|	not stirred to anger o wideruler come to us come thou to us in every fight.
अस्या ऊ षु ण उप सातये भुवो ऽहेळमानो ररिवां अजाश्व शरवस्यताम अजाश्व|	not stirred to anger come freegiver nigh to us to take this gift of ours thou who hast goats for steeds goatborne their gift who long for fame.
ओ षु तवा वव्र्तीमहि सतोमेभिर दस्म साधुभिः|	so wonderworker may we turn thee hither with effectual lauds.
नहि तवा पूषन्न अतिमन्य आघ्र्णे न ते सख्यम अपह्नुवे|	i slight thee not o pūṣan thou resplendent one thy friendship may not be despised.
अस्मा इदु पर तवसे तुराय परयो न हर्मि सतोमं माहिनाय|	even to him swift strong and high exalted i bring my song of praise as dainty viands.
रचीषमायाध्रिगव ओहमिन्द्राय बरह्माणि राततमा|	my thought to him resistless praisedeserving prayers offered most especially to indra.
अस्मा इदु परय इव पर यंसि भराम्याङगूषं बाधे सुव्र्क्ति|	praise like oblation i present and utter aloud my song my fair hymn to the victor.
इन्द्राय हर्दा मनसा मनीषा परत्नाय पत्ये धियोमर्जयन्त|	for indra who is lord of old the singers have decked their lauds with heart and mind and spirit.
अस्मा इदु तयमुपमं सवर्षां भराम्याङगूषमास्येन|	to him then with my lips mine adoration winning heavens light most excellent i offer.
मंहिष्ठमछोक्तिभिर्मतीनां सुव्र्क्तिभिः सूरिं वाव्र्धध्यै|	to magnify with songs of invocation and with fair hymns the lord most bounteous giver.
अस्मा इदु सतोमं सं हिनोमि रथं न तष्टेव तत्सिनाय|	even for him i frame a laud as fashions the wright a chariot for the man who needs it.
गिरश्च गिर्वाहसे सुव्र्क्तीन्द्राय विश्वमिन्वं मेधिराय|	praises to him who gladly hears our praises a hymn wellformed allmoving to wise indra.
अस्मा इदु सप्तिमिव शरवस्येन्द्रायार्कं जुह्वा समञ्जे|	so with my tongue i deck to please that indra my hymn as twere a horse through love of glory.
वीरं दानौकसं वन्दध्यै पुरां गूर्तश्रवसं दर्माणम|	to reverence the hero bounteous giver famed far and wide destroyer of the castles.
अस्मा इदु तवष्टा तक्षद वज्रं सवपस्तमं सवर्यं रणाय|	even for him hath tvaṣṭar forged the thunder most deftly wrought celestial for the battle.
वर्त्रस्य चिद विदद येन मर्म तुजन्नीशानस्तुजता कियेधाः|	wherewith he reached the vital parts of vṛtra strikingthe vast the mighty with the striker.
अस्येदु मातुः सवनेषु सद्यो महः पितुं पपिवाञ्चार्वन्ना|	as soon as at libations of his mother great viṣṇu had drunk up the draught he plundered.
मुषायद विष्णुः पचतं सहीयान विध्यद वराहन्तिरो अद्रिमस्ता|	the dainty cates the cooked mess but one stronger transfixed the wild boar shooting through the mountain.
अस्मा इदु गनाश्चिद देवपत्नीरिन्द्रायार्कमहिहत्य ऊवुः|	to him to indra when he slew the dragon the dames too consorts of the gods wove praises.
परि दयावाप्र्थिवी जभ्र उर्वी नास्य ते महिमानं परिष्टः|	the mighty heaven and earth hath he encompassed thy greatness heaven and earth combined exceed not.
अस्येदेव पर रिरिचे महित्वं दिवस पर्थिव्याः पर्यन्तरिक्षात|	yea of a truth his magnitude surpasseth the magnitude of earth midair and heaven.
सवराळ इन्द्रो दम आ विश्वगूर्तः सवरिरमत्रो ववक्षे रणाय|	indra approved by all men selfresplendent waxed in his home loudvoiced and strong for battle.
अस्येदेव शवसा शुषन्तं वि वर्श्चद वज्रेण वर्त्रमिन्द्रः|	through his own strength indra with bolt of thunder cut piecemeal vṛtra drier up of waters.
गा न वराणा अवनीरमुञ्चदभि शरवो दावने सचेताः|	he let the floods go free like cows imprisoned for glory with a heart inclined to bounty.
अस्येदु तवेषसा रन्त सिन्धवः परि यद वज्रेण सीमयछत|	the rivers played through his impetuous splendour since with his bolt he compassed them on all sides.
ईशानक्र्द दाशुषे दशस्यन तुर्वीतये गाधं तुर्वणिः कः|	using his might and favouring him who worshipped he made a ford victorious for turvīti.
अस्मा इदु पर भरा तूतुजानो वर्त्राय वज्रमीशानः कियेधाः|	vast with thine ample power with eager movement against this vṛtra cast thy bolt of thunder.
गोर्न पर्व वि रदा तिरश्चेष्यन्नर्णांस्यपां चरध्यै|	rend thou his joints as of an ox dissevered with bolt oblique that floods of rain may follow.
अस्येदु पर बरूहि पूर्व्याणि तुरस्य कर्माणि नव्य उक्थैः|	sing with new lauds his exploits wrought aforetime the deeds of him yea him who moveth swiftly.
युधे यदिष्णान आयुधान्य रघायमाणो निरिणाति शत्रून|	when hurling forth his weapons in the battle he with impetuous wrath lays low the foemen.
अस्येदु भिया गिरयश्च दर्ळ्हा दयावा च भूमा जनुषस्तुजेते|	when he yea he comes forth the firm set mountains and the whole heaven and earth tremble for terror.
उपो वेनस्य जोगुवान ओणिं सद्यो भुवद वीर्याय नोधाः|	may nodhas ever praising the protection of that dear friend gain quickly strength heroic.
अस्मा इदु तयदनु दाय्येषामेको यद वव्ने भूरेरीशानः|	now unto him of these things hath been given what he who rules alone oer much electeth.
परैतशं सूर्ये पस्प्र्धानं सौवश्व्ये सुष्विमावदिन्द्रः|	indra hath helped etaśa somapresser contending in the race of steeds with sūrya.
एवा ते हारियोजना सुव्र्क्तीन्द्र बरह्माणि गोतमासो अक्रन|	thus to thee indra yoker of bay coursers the gotamas have brought their prayers to please thee.
ऐषु विश्वपेशसं धियं धाः परातर मक्षू धियावसुर जगम्यात|	bestow upon them thought decked with all beauty may he enriched with prayer come soon and early.
बळ इत्था तद वपुषे धायि दर्शतं देवस्य भर्गः सहसो यतो जनि|	yea verily the fair effulgence of the god for glory was established since he sprang from strength.
यदीमुप हवरते साधते मतिर्र्तस्य धेन अनयन्त सस्रुतः|	when he inclines thereto successful is the hymn the songs of sacrifice have brought him as they flow.
पर्क्षो वपुः पितुमान नित्य आ शये दवितीयमा सप्तशिवासु मात्र्षु|	wonderful rich in nourishment he dwells in food next in the seven auspicious mothers is his home.
तर्तीयमस्य वर्षभस्य दोहसे दशप्रमतिं जनयन्त योषणः|	thirdly that they might drain the treasures of the bull the maidens brought forth him for whom the ten provide.
निर्यदीं बुध्नान महिषस्य वर्पस ईशानासः शवसाक्रन्त सूरयः|	what time from out the deep from the steers wondrous form the chiefs who had the power produced him with their strength.
यदीमनु परदिवो मध्व आधवे गुहा सन्तं मातरिश्वा मथायति|	when mātariśvan rubbed forth him who lay concealed for mixture of the sweet drink in the days of old.
पर यत पितुः परमान नीयते पर्या पर्क्षुधो वीरुधो दंसु रोहति|	when from the highest father he is brought to us amid the plants he rises hungry wondrously.
उभा यदस्य जनुषं यदिन्वत आदिद यविष्ठो अभवद घर्णा शुचिः|	as both together join to expedite his birth most youthful he is born resplendent in his light.
आदिन मातॄराविशद यास्वा शुचिरहिंस्यमान उर्वियावि वाव्र्धे|	then also entered he the mothers and in them pure and uninjured he increased in magnitude.
अनु यत पूर्वा अरुहत सनाजुवो नि नव्यसीष्ववरासु धावते|	as to the first he rose the vigorous from of old so now he runs among the younger lowest ones.
आदिद धोतारं वर्णते दिविष्टिषु भगमिव पप्र्चानास रञ्जते|	therefore they choose him herald at the morning rites pressing to him as unto bhaga pouring gifts.
देवान यत करत्वा मज्मना पुरुष्टुतो मर्तं संसं विश्वधा वेति धायसे|	when muchpraised by the power and will of gods he goes at all times to his mortal worshipper to drink.
वि यदस्थाद यजतो वातचोदितो हवारो न वक्वा जरणा अनाक्र्तः|	what time the holy one windurged hath risen up serpentlike winding through the dry grass unrestrained.
तस्य पत्मन दक्षुषः कर्ष्णजंहसः शुचिजन्मनो रज आ वयध्वनः|	dust lies upon the way of him who burneth all blackwinged and pure of birth who follows sundry paths.
रथो न यातः शिक्वभिः कर्तो दयामङगेभिररुषेभिरीयते|	like a swift chariot made by men who know their art he with his red limbs lifts himself aloft to heaven.
आदस्य ते कर्ष्णासो दक्षि सूरयः शूरस्येव तवेषथादीषते वयः|	thy worshippers become by burning black of hue their strength flies as before a heros violence.
तवया हयग्ने वरुणो धर्तव्रतो मित्रः शाशद्रे अर्यमा सुदानवः|	by thee o agni varuṇa who guards the law mitra and aryaman the bounteous are made strong.
यत सीमनु करतुना विश्वथा विभुररान न नेमिः परिभूरजायथाः|	for as the felly holds the spokes thou with thy might pervading hast been born encompassing them round.
तवमग्ने शशमानाय सुन्वते रत्नं यविष्ठ देवतातिमिन्वसि|	agni to him who toils and pours libations thou most youthful sendest wealth and all the host of gods.
तं तवा नु नव्यं सहसो युवन वयं भगं न कारेमहिरत्न धीमहि|	thee therefore even as bhaga will we set anew young child of strength most wealthy in our battlesong.
अस्मे रयिं न सवर्थं दमूनसं भगं दक्षं न पप्र्चासि धर्णसिम|	vouchsafe us riches turned to worthy ends good luck abiding in the house and strong capacity.
रश्मीन्रिव यो यमति जन्मनी उभे देवानां शंसं रत आ च सुक्रतुः|	wealth that directs both worlds as they were guidingreins and very wise the gods assent in sacrifice.
उत नः सुद्योत्मा जीराश्वो होता मन्द्रः शर्णवच्चन्द्ररथः|	may he the priest resplendent joyful hear us he with the radiant car and rapid horses.
स नो नेषन नेषतमैरमूरोअग्निर्वामं सुवितं वस्यो अछ|	may agni ever wise with best directions to bliss and highest happiness conduct us.
अस्ताव्यग्निः शिमीवद्भिरर्कैः साम्राज्याय परतरं दधानः|	with hymns of might hath agni now been lauded advanced to height of universal kingship.
अमी च ये मघवानो वयं च मिहं न सूरो अतिनिष टतन्युः|	now may these wealthy chiefs and we together spread forth as spreads the sun above the rainclouds.
उदु तयं जातवेदसं देवं वहन्ति केतवः|	his bright rays bear him up aloft the god who knoweth all that lives.
दर्शे विश्वाय सूर्यम|	sūrya that all may look on him.
अप तये तायवो यथा नक्षत्रा यन्त्यक्तुभिः|	the constellations pass away like thieves together with their beams.
सूराय विश्वचक्षसे|	before the allbeholding sun.
अद्र्श्रमस्य केतवो वि रश्मयो जनाननु|	his herald rays are seen afar refulgent oer the world of men.
भराजन्तो अग्नयो यथा|	like flames of fire that burn and blaze.
तरणिर्विश्वदर्शतो जयोतिष्क्र्दसि सूर्य|	swift and all beautiful art thou o sūrya maker of the light.
विश्वमा भासिरोचनम|	illuming all the radiant realm.
परत्यं देवानां विशः परत्यङङ उदेषि मानुषान|	thou goest to the hosts of gods thou comest hither to mankind.
परत्यं विश्वं सवर्द्र्शे|	hither all light to be beheld.
येना पावक चक्षसा भुरण्यन्तं जनाननु|	with that same eye of thine wherewith thou lookest brilliant varuṇa.
तवं वरुण पश्यसि|	upon the busy race of men.
वि दयामेषि रजस पर्थ्वहा मिमानो अक्तुभिः|	traversing sky and wide midair thou metest with thy beams our days.
पश्यञ जन्मानि सूर्य|	sun seeing all things that have birth.
सप्त तवा हरितो रथे वहन्ति देव सूर्य|	seven bay steeds harnessed to thy car bear thee o thou farseeing one.
शोचिष्केशं विचक्षण|	god sūrya with the radiant hair.
अयुक्त सप्त शुन्ध्युवः सूरो रथस्य नप्त्यः|	sūrya hath yoked the pure bright seven the daughters of the car with these.
ताभिर्याति सवयुक्तिभिः|	his own dear team he goeth forth.
उद वयं तमसस परि जयोतिष पश्यन्त उत्तरम|	looking upon the loftier light above the darkness we have come.
देवं देवत्रा सूर्यमगन्म जयोतिरुत्तमम|	to sūrya god among the gods the light that is most excellent.
उद्यन्नद्य मित्रमह आरोहन्नुत्तरां दिवम|	rising this day o rich in friends ascending to the loftier heaven.
हर्द्रोगं ममसूर्य हरिमाणं च नाशय|	sūrya remove my hearts disease take from me this my yellow hue.
शुकेषु मे हरिमाणं रोपणाकासु दध्मसि|	to parrots and to starlings let us give away my yellowness.
अथो हारिद्रवेषु मे हरिमाणं नि दध्मसि|	or this my yellowness let us transfer to haritāla trees.
उदगादयमादित्यो विश्वेन सहसा सह|	with all his conquering vigour this Āditya hath gone up on high.
दविषन्तं मह्यं रन्धयन मो अहम दविषते रधम|	giving my foe into mine hand let me not be my foemans prey.
इत्था हि सोम इन मदे बरह्मा चकार वर्धनम|	thus in the soma in wild joy the brahman hath exalted thee.
शविष्ठ वज्रिन्नोजसा पर्थिव्या निः शशा अहिमर्चन्ननु सवराज्यम|	thou mightiest thunderarmed hast driven by force the dragon from the earth lauding thine own imperial sway.
स तवामदद वर्षा मदः सोमः शयेनाभ्र्तः सुतः|	the mighty flowing somadraught brought by the hawk hath gladdened thee.
येनाव्र्त्रं निरद्भ्यो जघन्थ वज्रिन्नोजसार्चन्न|	that in thy strength o thunderer thou hast struck down vṛtra from the floods lauding thine own imperial sway.
परेह्यभीहि धर्ष्णुहि न ते वज्रो नि यंसते|	go forward meet the foe be bold thy bolt of thunder is not checked.
इन्द्र नर्म्णं हि ते शवो हनो वर्त्रं जया अपोअर्चन्न|	manliness indra is thy might stay vṛtra make the waters thine lauding thine own imperial sway.
निरिन्द्र भूम्या अधि वर्त्रं जघन्थ निर्दिवः|	thou smotest vṛtra from the earth smotest him indra from the sky.
सर्जा मरुत्वतीरव जीवधन्या इमा अपोअर्चन्न|	let these lifefostering waters flow attended by the marut host lauding thine own imperial sway.
इन्द्रो वर्त्रस्य दोधतः सानुं वज्रेण हीळितः|	the wrathful indra with his bolt of thunder rushing on the foe.
अभिक्रम्याव जिघ्नतेअपः सर्माय चोदयन्नर्चन्न|	smote fierce on trembling vṛtras back and loosed the waters free to run lauding his own imperial sway.
अधि सानौ नि जिघ्नते वज्रेण शतपर्वणा|	with hundredjointed thunderbolt indra hath struck him on the back.
मन्दान इन्द्रो अन्धसः सखिभ्यो गातुमिछत्यर्चन्न|	and while rejoicing in the juice seeketh prosperity for friends lauding his own imperial sway.
इन्द्र तुभ्यमिदद्रिवोअनुत्तं वज्रिन वीर्यम|	indra unconquered might is thine thunderer caster of the stone.
यद ध तयम्मायिनं मर्गं तमु तवं माययावधीरर्चन्न|	for thou with thy surpassing power smotest to death the guileful beast lauding thine own imperial sway.
वि ते वज्रासो अस्थिरन नवतिं नाव्या अनु|	far over ninety spacious floods thy thunderbolts were cast abroad.
महत त इन्द्र वीर्यं बाह्वोस्ते बलं हितमर्चन्न|	great indra is thy hero might and strength is seated in thine arms lauding thine own imperial sway.
सहस्रं साकमर्चत परि षटोभत विंशतिः|	laud him a thousand all at once shout twenty forth the hymn of praise.
शतैनमन्वनोनवुरिन्द्राय बरह्मोद्यतमर्चन्न|	hundreds have sung aloud to him to indra hath the prayer been raised lauding his own imperial sway.
इन्द्रो वर्त्रस्य तविषीं निरहन सहसा सहः|	indra hath smitten down the power of vṛtramight with stronger might.
महत तदस्य पौंस्यं वर्त्रं जघन्वानस्र्जदर्चन्न|	this was his manly exploit he slew vṛtra and let loose the floods lauding his own imperial sway.
इमे चित तव मन्यवे वेपेते भियसा मही|	yea even this great pair of worlds trembled in terror at thy wrath.
यदिन्द्र वज्रिन्नोजसा वर्त्रं मरुत्वानवधीरर्चन्न|	when indra thunderer marutgirt thou slewest vṛtra in thy strength lauding thine own imperial sway.
न वेपसा न तन्यतेन्द्रं वर्त्रो वि बीभयत|	but vṛtra scared not indra with his shaking or his thunder roar.
अभ्येनं वज्र आयसः सहस्रभ्र्ष्टिरायतार्चन्न|	on him that iron thunderbolt fell fiercely with its thousand points lauding his own imperial sway.
यद वर्त्रं तव चशनिं वज्रेण समयोधयः|	when with the thunder thou didst make thy dart and vṛtra meet in war.
अहिमिन्द्रजिघांसतो दिवि ते बद्बधे शवोअर्चन्न|	thy might o indra fain to slay the dragon was set firm in heaven lauding thine own imperial sway.
अभिष्टने ते अद्रिवो यत सथा जगच्च रेजते|	when at thy shout o thunderarmed each thing both fixed and moving shook.
तवष्टा चित तव मन्यव इन्द्र वेविज्यते भियार्चन्न|	een tvaṣṭar trembled at thy wrath and quaked with fear because of thee lauding thine own imperial sway.
नहि नु यादधीमसीन्द्रं को वीर्या परः|	there is not in our knowledge one who passeth indra in his strength.
तस्मिन नर्म्णमुत करतुं देवा ओजांसि सं दधुरर्चन्न|	in him the deities have stored manliness insight power and might lauding his own imperial sway.
यमथर्व मनुष पिता दध्यं धियमत्नत|	still as of old whatever rite atharvan manus sire of all.
तस्मिन बरह्माणि पुर्वथेन्द्र उक्था समग्मतार्चन्न|	dadhyach performed their prayer and praise united in that indra meet lauding his own imperial sway.
अग्ने नय सुपथा राये अस्मान विश्वानि देव वयुनानि विद्वान|	by goodly paths lead us to riches agni god who knowest every sacred duty.
युयोध्यस्मज्जुहुराणमेनो भूयिष्ठां ते नमौक्तिंविधेम|	remove the sin that makes us stray and wander most ample adoration will we bring thee.
अग्ने तवं पारया नव्यो अस्मान सवस्तिभिरति दुर्गाणि विश्वा|	lead us anew to happiness o agni lead us beyond all danger and affliction.
पुश्च पर्थ्वी बहुला न उर्वि भवा तोकाय तनयाय शं योः|	be unto us a wide broad ample castle bless prosper on their way our sons and offspring.
अग्ने तवमस्मद युयोध्यमीवा अनग्नित्रा अभ्यमन्त कर्ष्टीः|	far from us agni put thou all diseases let them strike lauds that have no saving agni.
पुनरस्मभ्यं सुविताय देव कषां विश्वेभिरम्र्तेभिर्यजत्र|	god make our home again to be a blessing with all the immortal deities o holy.
पाहि नो अग्ने पायुभिरजस्रैरुत परिये सदन आ शुशुक्वान|	preserve us agni with perpetual succour refulgent in the dwelling which thou lovest.
मा ते भयं जरितारं यविष्ठ नूनं विदन मापरं सहस्वः|	o conqueror most youthful let no danger touch him who praises thee today or after.
मा नो अग्नेअव सर्जो अघायाविष्यवे रिपवे दुछुनायै|	give not us up a prey to sin o agni the greedy enemy that brings us trouble.
मादत्वते दशते मादते नो मा रीषते सहसावन परा दाः|	not to the fanged that bites not to the toothless give not us up thou conqueror to the spoiler.
वि घ तवावान रतजात यंसद गर्णानो अग्ने तन्वे वरूथम|	such as thou art born after law o agni when lauded give protection to our bodies.
विश्वाद रिरिक्षोरुत वा निनित्सोरभिह्रुतामसि हि देव विष्पट|	from whosoever would reproach or injure for thou god rescuest from all oppression.
तवं तानग्न उभयानिव विद्वान वेषि परपित्वे मनुषो यजत्र|	thou well discerning both these classes comest to men at early morn o holy agni.
अभिपित्वे मनवे शास्यो भूर्मर्म्र्जेन्य उशिग्भिर्नाक्रः|	be thou obedient unto man at evening to be adorned as keen by eager suitors.
अवोचाम निवचनान्यस्मिन मानस्य सूनुः सहसाने अग्नौ|	to him have we addressed our pious speeches i mānas son to him victorious agni.
वयं सहस्रं रषिभिः सनेम वि|	may we gain countless riches with the sages may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
शरीणन्नुप सथाद दिवं भुरण्यु सथातुश्चरथमक्तून्व्यूर्णोत|	commingling restless he ascends the sky unveiling nights and all that stands or moves.
परि यदेषामेको विश्वेषां भुवद देवो देवानां महित्वा|	as he the sole god is preeminent in greatness among all these other gods.
आदित ते विश्वे करतुं जुषन्त शुष्काद यद देव जीवो जनिष्ठाः|	all men are joyful in thy power o god that living from the dry wood thou art born.
भजन्त विश्वे देवत्वं नाम रतं सपन्तो अम्र्तमेवैः|	all truly share thy godhead while they keep in their accustomed ways eternal law.
रतस्य परेषा रतस्य धीतिर्विश्वायुर्विश्वे अपांसि चक्रुः|	strong is the thought of law the laws behest all works have they performed he quickens all.
यस्तुभ्यं दाशाद यो वा ते शिक्षात तस्मै चिकित्वान्रयिं दयस्व|	whoso will bring oblation gifts to thee to him bethinking thee vouchsafe thou wealth.
होता निषत्तो मनोरपत्ये स चिन नवासां पती रयीणाम|	seated as priest with manus progeny of all these treasures he alone is lord.
इछन्त रेतो मिथस्तनूषु सं जानत सवैर्दक्षैरमूराः|	men yearn for children to prolong their line and are not disappointed in their hope.
पितुर्न पुत्राः करतुं जुषन्त शरोषन ये अस्य शासं तुरासः|	eagerly they who hear his word fulfil his wish as sons obey their sires behest.
वि राय और्णोद दुरः पुरुक्षुः पिपेश नाकं सत्र्भिर्दमूनाः|	he rich in food unbars his wealth like doors he the housefriend hath decked heavens vault with stars.
मथीद यदीं विष्टो मातरिश्वा होतारं विश्वाप्सुं विश्वदेव्यम|	what mātariśvan piercing formed by friction herald of all the gods in varied figure.
नि यं दधुर्मनुष्यासु विक्षु सवर्ण चित्रं वपुषे विभावम|	is he whom they have set mid human houses gayhued as light and shining forth for beauty.
ददानमिन न ददभन्त मन्माग्निर्वरूथं मम तस्य चाकन|	they shall not harm the man who brings thee praises such as i am agni my help approves me.
जुषन्त विश्वन्यस्य कर्मोपस्तुतिं भरमाणस्य कारोः|	all acts of mine shall they accept with pleasure laudation from the singer who presents it.
नित्ये चिन नु यं सदने जग्र्भ्रे परशस्तिभिर्दधिरे यज्ञियसः|	him in his constant seat men skilled in worship have taken and with praises have established.
पर सू नयन्त गर्भयन्त इष्टावश्वासो न रथ्योररहणाः|	as harnessed to a chariot fleetfoot horses at his command let bearers lead him forward.
पुरूणि दस्मो नि रिणाति जम्भैराद रोचते वन आ विभावा|	wondrous full many a thing he chews and crunches he shines amid the wood with spreading brightness.
आदस्य वातो अनु वाति शोचिरस्तुर्न शर्यामसनामनु दयून|	upon his glowing flames the wind blows daily driving them like the keen shaft of an archer.
न यं रिपवो न रिषण्यवो गर्भे सन्तं रेषणा रेषयन्ति|	him whom while yet in embryo the hostile both skilled and fain to harm may never injure.
अन्धा अपश्या न दभन्नभिख्या नित्यास ईं परेतारो अरक्षन|	men blind and sightless through his splendour hurt not his neverfailing lovers have preserved him.
यं रक्षन्ति परचेतसो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	neer is he injured whom the gods varuṇa mitra aryaman.
नू चित स दभ्यते जनः|	the excellently wise protect.
यं बाहुतेव पिप्रति पान्ति मर्त्यं रिषः|	he prospers ever free from scathe whom they as with full hands enrich.
अरिष्टः सर्व एधते|	whom they preserve from every foe.
वि दुर्गा वि दविषः पुरो घनन्ति राजान एषाम|	the kings drive far away from him his troubles and his enemies.
नयन्ति दुरिता तिरः|	and lead him safely oer distress.
सुगः पन्था अन्र्क्षर आदित्यास रतं यते|	thornless Ādityas is the path easy for him who seeks the law.
नात्रावखादो अस्ति वः|	with him is naught to anger you.
यं यज्ञं नयथा नर आदित्या रजुना पथा|	what sacrifice Ādityas ye heroes guide by the path direct.
पर वः स धीतये नशत|	may that come nigh unto your thought.
स रत्नं मर्त्यो वसु विश्वं तोकमुत तमना|	that mortal ever unsubdued gains wealth and every precious thing.
अछा गछत्यस्त्र्तः|	and children also of his own.
कथा राधाम सखायः सतोमं मित्रस्यार्यम्णः|	how my friends shall we prepare aryamans and mitras laud.
महि पसरो वरुणस्य|	glorious food of varuṇa.
मा वो घनन्तं मा शपन्तं परति वोचे देवयन्तम|	i point not out to you a man who strikes the pious or reviles.
सुम्नैरिद व आ विवासे|	only with hymns i call you nigh.
चतुरश्चिद ददमानाद बिभीयादा निधातोः|	let him not love to speak ill words but fear the one who holds all four.
न दुरुक्ताय सप्र्हयेत|	within his hand until they fall.
अयं देवाय जन्मने सतोमो विप्रेभिरासया|	for the celestial race this song of praise which gives wealth lavishly.
अकारि रत्नधातमः|	was made by singers with their lips.
य इन्द्राय वचोयुजा ततक्षुर्मनसा हरी|	they who for indra with their mind formed horses harnessed by a word.
शमीभिर्यज्ञमाशत|	attained by works to sacrifice.
तक्षन नासत्याभ्यां परिज्मानं सुखं रथम|	they for the two nāsatyas wrought a light car moving every way.
तक्षन धेनुं सबर्दुघाम|	they formed a nectaryielding cow.
युवाना पितरा पुनः सत्यमन्त्रा रजूयवः|	the Ṛbhus with effectual prayers honest with constant labour made.
रभवो विष्ट्यक्रत|	their sire and mother young again.
सं वो मदासो अग्मतेन्द्रेण च मरुत्वता|	together came your gladdening drops with indra by the maruts girt.
आदित्येभिश्च राजभिः|	with the Ādityas with the kings.
उत तयं चमसं नवं तवष्टुर्देवस्य निष्क्र्तम|	the sacrificial ladle wrought newly by the god tvaṣṭars hand.
अकर्तचतुरः पुनः|	four ladles have ye made thereof.
ते नो रत्नानि धत्तन तरिरा साप्तानि सुन्वते|	vouchsafe us wealth to him who pours thrice seven libations yea to each.
एकमएकंसुशस्तिभिः|	give wealth pleased with our eulogies.
अधारयन्त वह्नयोअभजन्त सुक्र्त्यया|	as ministering priests they held by pious acts they won themselves.
भागं देवेषु यज्ञियम|	a share in sacrifice with gods.
उप पर जिन्वन्नुशतीरुशन्तं पतिं न नित्यं जनयः सनीळाः|	loving the loving one as wives their husband the sisters of one home have urged him forward.
सवसारः शयावीमरुषीमजुष्रञ्चित्रमुछन्तीमुषसं न गावः|	brightcoloured even as the cows love morning dark breaking forth to view and redly beaming.
वीळु चिद दर्ळ्हा पितरो न उक्थैरद्रिं रुजन्नङगिरसो रवेण|	our sires with lauds burst een the firmset fortress yea the aṅgirases with roar the mountain.
चक्रुर्दिवो बर्हतो गातुमस्मे अहः सवर्विविदुः केतुमुस्राः|	they made for us a way to reach high heaven they found us day light days sign beams of morning.
दधन्न्र्तं धनयन्नस्य धीतिमादिदर्यो दिधिष्वो विभ्र्त्राः|	they stablished order made his service fruitful then parting them among the longing faithful.
अत्र्ष्यन्तीरपसो यन्त्यछा देवाञ जन्म परयसा वर्धयन्तीः|	not thirsting after aught they come most active while with sweet food the race of gods they strengthen.
मथीद यदीं विभ्र्तो मातरिश्वा गर्हेगर्हे शयेतो जेन्यो भूत|	since mātariśvan fardiffused hath stirred him and he in every house grown bright and noble.
आदीं राज्ञे न सहीयसे सचा सन्ना दूत्यं भर्गवाणो विवाय|	he bhṛgulike i hath gone as his companion as on commission to a greater sovran.
महे यत पित्र ईं रसं दिवे करव तसरत पर्शन्यश्चिकित्वान|	when man poured juice to heaven the mighty father he knew and freed himself from close embracement.
सर्जदस्ता धर्षता दिद्युमस्मै सवायां देवो दुहितरि तविषिं धात|	the archer boldly shot at him his arrow and the god threw his splendour on his daughter.
सव आ यस्तुभ्यं दम आ विभाति नमो वा दाशादुशतो अनु दयून|	whoso hath flames for thee within his dwelling or brings the worship which thou lovest daily.
वर्धो अग्ने वयो अस्य दविबर्हा यासद राया सरथं यं जुनासि|	do thou of double might increase his substance may he whom thou incitest meet with riches.
अग्निं विश्वा अभि पर्क्षः सचन्ते समुद्रं न सरवतः सप्त यह्वीः|	all sacrificial viands wait on agni as the seven mighty rivers seek the ocean.
न जामिभिर्वि चिकिते वयो नो विदा देवेषु परमतिं चिकित्वान|	not by our brethren was our food discovered find with the gods care for us thou who knowest.
आ यदिषे नर्पतिं तेज आनट छुचि रेतो निषिक्तं दयौरभीके|	when light hath filled the lord of men for increase straight from the heaven descends the limpid moisture.
अग्निः शर्धमनवद्यं युवानं सवाध्यं जनयत सूदयच्च|	agni hath brought to light and filled with spirit the youthful host blameless and well providing.
मनो न योअध्वनः सद्य एत्येकः सत्रा सूरो वस्व ईशे|	he who like thought goes swiftly on his journey the sun alone is ever lord of riches.
राजाना मित्रावरुणा सुपाणी गोषु परियमम्र्तं रक्षमाणा|	the kings with fair hands varuṇa and mitra protect the precious nectar in our cattle.
मा नो अग्ने सख्या पित्र्याणि पर मर्षिष्ठा अभि विदुष कविः सन|	o agni break not our ancestral friendship sage as thou art endowed with deepest knowledge.
नभो न रूपं जरिमा मिनाति पुरा तस्या अभिशस्तेरधीहि|	old age like gathering cloud impairs the body before that evil be come nigh protect me.
परत्वक्षसः परतवसो विरप्शिनोअनानता अविथुरा रजीषिणः|	loud singers never humbled active full of strength immovable impetuous manliest bestbeloved.
जुष्टतमासो नर्तमासो अञ्जिभिर्व्यानज्रे के चिदुस्रा इव सत्र्भिः|	they have displayed themselves with glittering ornaments a few in number only like the heavens with stars.
उपह्वरेषु यदचिध्वं ययिं वय इव मरुतः केन चित पथा|	when maruts on the steeps ye pile the moving cloud ye are like birds on whatsoever path it be.
शचोतन्ति कोशा उप वो रथेष्वा घर्तमुक्षता मधुवर्णमर्चते|	clouds everywhere shed forth the rain upon your cars drop fatness honeyhued for him who sings your praise.
परैषामज्मेषु विथुरेव रेजते भूमिर्यामेषु यद ध युञ्जते शुभे|	earth at their racings trembles as if weak and worn when on their ways they yoke their cars for victory.
ते करीळयो धुनयो भराजद्र्ष्टयः सवयं महित्वं पनयन्त धूतयः|	they sportive loudly roaring armed with glittering spears shakers of all themselves admire their mightiness.
स हि सवस्र्त पर्षदश्वो युवा गणोअया ईशानस्तविषीभिराव्र्तः|	selfmoving is that youthful band with spotted steeds thus it hath lordly sway endued with power and might.
असि सत्य रणयावानेद्योअस्या धियः पराविताथा वर्षा गणः|	truthful art thou and blameless searcher out of sin so thou strong host wilt be protector of this prayer.
पितुः परत्नस्य जन्मना वदामसि सोमस्य जिह्वा पर जिगाति चक्षसा|	we speak by our descent from our primeval sire our tongue when we behold the soma stirs itself.
यदीमिन्द्रं शम्य रक्वाण आशतादिन नामानि यज्ञियानि दधिरे|	when shouting they had joined indra in toil of fight then only they obtained their sacrificial names.
शरियसे कं भानुभिः सं मिमिक्षिरे ते रश्मिभिस्त रक्वभिः सुखादयः|	splendours they gained for glory they who wear bright rings rays they obtained and men to celebrate their praise.
ते वाशीमन्त इष्मिणो अभीरवो विद्रे परियस्य मारुतस्य धाम्नः|	armed with their swords impetuous and fearing naught they have possessed the maruts own beloved home.
महः स राय एषते पतिर्दन्निन इनस्य वसुनः पद आ|	hither he hastens to give lord of great riches king of the mighty to the place of treasure.
उप धरजन्तमद्रयो विधन्नित|	the pressingstones shall serve him speeding near us.
स यो वर्षा नरां न रोदस्योः शरवोभिरस्ति जीवपीतसर्गः|	as steer of men so steer of earth and heaven by glory he whose streams all life hath drunken.
पर यः सस्राणः शिश्रीत योनौ|	who hasting forward rests upon the altar.
आ यः पुरं नार्मिणीमदीदेदत्यः कविर्नभन्यो नार्व|	he who hath lighted up the joyous castle wise courser like the steed of cloudy heaven.
सूरो न रुरुक्वाञ्छतात्मा|	bright like the sun with hundredfold existence.
अभि दविजन्मा तरी रोचनानि विश्व रजांसि शुशुचनो अस्थात|	he doubly born hath spread in his effulgence through the three luminous realms through all the regions.
होता यजिष्ठो अपां सधस्थे|	best sacrificing priest where waters gather.
अयं स होत यो दविजन्मा विश्वा दधे वार्याणि शरवस्या|	priest doubly born he through his love of glory hath in his keeping all things worth the choosing.
मर्तो यो अस्मै सुतुको ददाश|	the man who brings him gifts hath noble offspring.
रजुनीती नो वरुणो मित्रो नयतु विद्वान|	may varuṇa with guidance straight and mitra lead us he who knows.
अर्यमा देवैः सजोषाः|	and aryaman in accord with gods.
ते हि वस्वो वसवानास्ते अप्रमूरा महोभिः|	for they are dealers forth of wealth and not deluded with their might.
वरता रक्षन्ते विश्वाहा|	guard evermore the holy laws.
ते अस्मभ्यं शर्म यंसन्नम्र्ता मर्त्येभ्यः|	shelter may they vouchsafe to us immortal gods to mortal men.
बाधमानाप दविषः|	chasing our enemies away.
वि नः पथः सुविताय चियन्त्विन्द्रो मरुतः|	may they mark out our paths to bliss indra the maruts pūṣan.
पूषा भगो वन्द्यासः|	and bhaga the gods to be adored.
उत नो धियो गोग्राः पूषन विष्णवेवयावः|	yea pūṣan viṣṇu ye who run your course enrich our hymns with kine.
कर्ता नः सवस्तिमतः|	bless us with all prosperity.
मधु वाता रतायते मधु कषरन्ति सिन्धवः|	the winds waft sweets the rivers pour sweets for the man who keeps the law.
माध्वीर्नः सन्त्वोषधीः|	so may the plants be sweet for us.
मधु नक्तमुतोषसो मधुमत पार्थिवं रजः|	sweet be the night and sweet the dawns sweet the terrestrial atmosphere.
मधु दयौरस्तु नः पिता|	sweet be our father heaven to us.
मधुमान नो वनस्पतिर्मधुमानस्तु सूर्यः|	may the tall tree be full of sweets for us and full of sweets the sun.
माध्वीर्गावो भवन्तु नः|	may our milchkine be sweet for us.
शं नो मित्रः शं वरुणः शं नो भवत्वर्यमा|	be mitra gracious unto us and varuṇa and aryaman.
शं न इन्द्रो बर्हस्पतिः शं नो विष्णुरुरुक्रमः|	indra bṛhaspati be kind and viṣṇu of the mighty stride.
ततं मे अपस्तदु तायते पुनः सवादिष्ठा धीतिरुचथाय शस्यते|	the holy work i wrought before is wrought again my sweetest hymn is sung to celebrate your praise.
अयं समुद्र इह विश्वदेव्यः सवाहाक्र्तस्य समु तर्प्णुत रभवः|	here o ye Ṛbhus is this sea for all the gods sate you with soma offered with the hallowing word.
आभोगयं पर यदिछन्त ऐतनापाकाः पराञ्चो मम के चिदापयः|	when seeking your enjoyment onward from afar ye certain of my kinsmen wandered on your way.
सौधन्वनासश्चरितस्य भूमनागछत सवितुर्दाशुषो गर्हम|	sons of sudhanvan after your long journeying ye came unto the home of liberal savitar.
तत सविता वोअम्र्तत्वामासुवदगोह्यं यच्छ्रवयन्त ऐतन|	savitar therefore gave you immortality because ye came proclaiming him whom naught can hide.
तयं चिच्चमसमसुरस्य भक्षणमेकं सन्तमक्र्णुता चतुर्वयम|	and this the drinkingchalice of the asura which till that time was one ye made to be fourfold.
विष्ट्वी शमी तरणित्वेन वाघतो मर्तासः सन्तो अम्र्तत्वमानशुः|	when they had served with zeal at sacrifice as priests they mortal as they were gained immortality.
सौधन्वना रभवः सूरचक्षसः संवत्सरे समप्र्च्यन्त धीतिभिः|	the Ṛbhus children of sudhanvan bright as suns were in a years course made associate with prayers.
कषेत्रमिव वि ममुस्तेजनेनमेकं पात्रं रभवो जेहमानम|	the Ṛbhus with a rod measured as twere a field the single sacrificial chalice wide of mouth.
उपस्तुता उपमं नाधमाना अमर्त्येषु शरव इछमानाः|	lauded of all who saw praying for what is best desiring glorious fame among immortal gods.
आ मनीषामन्तरिक्षस्य नर्भ्यः सरुचेव घर्तं जुहवाम विद्मना|	as oil in ladles we through knowledge will present unto the heroes of the firmament our hymn.
तरणित्वा ये पितुरस्य सश्चिर रभवो वाजमरुहन दिवो रजः|	the Ṛbhus who came near with this great fathers speed and rose to heavens high sphere to eat the strengthening food.
रभुर्न इन्द्रः शवसा नवीयान रभुर्वाजेभिर्वसुभिर्वसुर्ददिः|	Ṛbhu to us is indra freshest in his might Ṛbhu with powers and wealth is giver of rich gifts.
युष्माकं देवा अवसाहनि परियेअभि तिष्ठेमप्र्त्सुतीरसुन्वताम|	gods through your favour may we on the happy day quell the attacks of those who pour no offerings forth.
निश्चर्मण रभवो गामपिंशत सं वत्सेनास्र्जता मातरं पुनः|	out of a skin o Ṛbhus once ye formed a cow and brought the mother close unto her calf again.
सौधन्वनासः सवपस्यया नरो जिव्री युवाना पितराक्र्णोतन|	sons of sudhanvan heroes with surpassing skill ye made your aged parents youthful as before.
वाजेभिर्नो वाजसातावविड्ढ्य रभुमानिन्द्र चित्रमा दर्षि राधः|	help us with strength where spoil is won o indra joined with the Ṛbhus give us varied bounty.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
युञ्जन्ति बरध्नमरुषं चरन्तं परि तस्थुषः|	they who stand round him as he moves harness the bright the ruddy steed.
रोचन्तेरोचना दिवि|	the lights are shining in the sky.
युञ्जन्त्यस्य काम्या हरी विपक्षसा रथे|	on both sides to the car they yoke the two bay coursers dear to him.
शोणा धर्ष्णू नर्वाहसा|	bold tawny bearers of the chief.
केतुं कर्ण्वन्नकेतवे पेशो मर्या अपेशसे|	thou making light where no light was and form o men where form was not.
समुषद्भिरजायथाः|	wast born together with the dawns.
आदह सवधामनु पुनर्गर्भत्वमेरिरे|	thereafter they as is their wont threw off the state of babes unborn.
दधाना नामयज्ञियम|	assuming sacrificial names.
वीळु चिदारुजत्नुभिर्गुहा चिदिन्द्र वह्निभिः|	thou indra with the tempestgods the breakers down of what is firm.
अविन्द उस्रिया अनु|	foundest the kine even in the cave.
देवयन्तो यथा मतिमछा विदद्वसुं गिरः|	worshipping even as they list singers laud him who findeth wealth.
महामनूषत शरुतम|	the farrenowned the mighty one.
इन्द्रेण सं हि दर्क्षसे संजग्मानो अबिभ्युषा|	mayest thou verily be seen coming by fearless indras side.
मन्दू समानवर्चसा|	both joyous equal in your sheen.
अनवद्यैरभिद्युभिर्मखः सहस्वदर्चति|	with indras well beloved hosts the blameless hastening to heaven.
गणैरिन्द्रस्य काम्यैः|	the sacrificer cries aloud.
अतः परिज्मन्ना गहि दिवो वा रोचनादधि|	come from this place o wanderer or downward from the light of heaven.
समस्मिन्न्र्ञ्जते गिरः|	our songs of praise all yearn for this.
इतो वा सातिमीमहे दिवो वा पार्थिवादधि|	indra we seek to give us help from here from heaven above the earth.
इन्द्रं महोवा रजसः|	or from the spacious firmament.
तीव्राः सोमास आ गह्याशीर्वन्तः सुता इमे|	strong are the somas come thou nigh these juices have been mixt with milk.
वायो तान परस्थितान पिब|	drink vāyu the presented draughts.
उभा देवा दिविस्प्र्शेन्द्रवायू हवामहे|	both deities who touch the heaven indra and vāyu we invoke.
अस्य सोमस्य पीतये|	to drink of this our soma juice.
इन्द्रवायू मनोजुवा विप्रा हवन्त ऊतये|	the singers for their aid invoke indra and vāyu swift as mind.
सहस्राक्षा धियस पती|	the thousandeyed the lords of thought.
मित्रं वयं हवामहे वरुणं सोमपीतये|	mitra and varuṇa renowned as gods of consecrated might.
जज्ञाना पूतदक्षसा|	we call to drink the soma juice.
रतेन याव रताव्र्धाव रतस्य जयोतिषस पती|	those who by law uphold the law lords of the shining light of law.
ता मित्रावरुणा हुवे|	mitra i call and varuṇa.
वरुणः पराविता भुवन मित्रो विश्वाभिरूतिभिः|	let varuṇa be our chief defence let mitra guard us with all aids.
करतां नः सुराधसः|	both make us rich exceedingly.
मरुत्वन्तं हवामह इन्द्रमा सोमपीतये|	indra by maruts girt we call to drink the soma juice may he.
सजूर्गणेन तरिम्पतु|	sate him in union with his troop.
इन्द्रज्येष्ठा मरुद्गणा देवासः पूषरातयः|	gods marut hosts whom indra leads distributers of pūṣans gifts.
विश्वे मम शरुता हवम|	hearken ye all unto my cry.
हत वर्त्रं सुदानव इन्द्रेण सहसा युजा|	with conquering indra for ally strike vṛtra down ye bounteous gods.
मा नो दुःशंस ईशत|	let not the wicked master us.
विश्वान देवान हवामहे मरुतः सोमपीतये|	we call the universal gods and maruts to the soma draught.
उग्रा हि पर्श्निमातरः|	for passing strong are pṛśnis sons.
जयतामिव तन्यतुर्मरुतामेति धर्ष्णुया|	fierce comes the maruts thundering voice like that of conquerors when ye go.
यच्छुभं याथना नरः|	forward to victory o men.
हस्काराद विद्युतस पर्यतो जाता अवन्तु नः|	born of the laughing lightning may the maruts guard us everywhere.
मरुतो मर्ळयन्तु नः|	may they be gracious unto us.
आ पूषञ्चित्रबर्हिषमाघ्र्णे धरुणं दिवः|	like some lost animal drive to us bright pūṣan him who bears up heaven.
आजा नष्टं यथा पशुम|	resting on manycoloured grass.
पूषा राजानमाघ्र्णिरपगूळ्हं गुहा हितम|	pūṣan the bright has found the king concealed and hidden in a cave.
अविन्दच्चित्रबर्हिषम|	who rests on grass of many hues.
उतो स मह्यमिन्दुभिः षड युक्ताननुसेषिधत|	and may he duly bring to me the six bound closely through these drops.
गोभिर्यवं न चर्क्र्षत|	as one who ploughs with steers brings corn.
अम्बयो यन्त्यध्वभिर्जामयो अध्वरीयताम|	along their paths the mothers go sisters of priestly ministrants.
पर्ञ्चतीर्मधुना पयः|	mingling their sweetness with the milk.
अमूर्या उप सूर्ये याभिर्वा सूर्यः सह|	may waters gathered near the sun and those wherewith the sun is joined.
ता नो हिन्वन्त्वध्वरम|	speed forth this sacrifice of ours.
अपो देवीरुप हवये यत्र गावः पिबन्ति नः|	i call the waters goddesses wherein our cattle quench their thirst.
सिन्दुभ्यः कर्त्वं हविः|	oblations to the streams be given.
अप्स्वन्तरम्र्तमप्सु भेषजमपामुत परशस्तये|	amrit is in the waters in the waters there is healing balm.
देवाभवत वाजिनः|	be swift ye gods to give them praise.
अप्सु मे सोमो अब्रवीदन्तर्विश्वानि भेषजा|	within the waterssoma thus hath told medwell all balms that heal.
अग्निं च विश्वशम्भुवमापश्च विश्वभेषजीः|	and agni he who blesseth all the waters hold all medicines.
आपः पर्णीत भेषजं वरूथं तन्वे मम|	o waters teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm.
जयोक च सूर्यं दर्शे|	so that i long may see the sun.
इदमापः पर वहत यत किं च दुरितं मयि|	whatever sin is found in me whatever evil i have wrought.
यद वाहमभिदुद्रोह यद वा शेप उतान्र्तम|	if i have lied or falsely sworn waters remove it far from me.
आपो अद्यान्वचारिषं रसेन समगस्महि|	the waters i this day have sought and to their moisture have we come.
पयस्वानग्न आगहि तं मा सं सर्ज वर्चसा|	o agni rich in milk come thou and with thy splendour cover me.
सं माग्ने वर्चसा सर्ज सं परजया समायुषा|	fill me with splendour agni give offspring and length of days the gods.
विद्युर्मेस्य देवा इन्द्रो विद्यात सह रषिभिः|	shall know me even as i am and indra with the Ṛṣis know.
वर्ष्णे शर्धाय सुमखाय वेधसे नोधः सुव्र्क्तिं पर भरा मरुद्भ्यः|	bring for the manly host wise and majestical o nodhas for the maruts bring thou a pure gift.
अपो न धीरो मनसा सुहस्त्यो गिरः समञ्जे विदथेष्वाभुवः|	i deck my songs as one defthanded wise in mind prepares the water that hath power in solemn rites.
ते जज्ञिरे दिव रष्वास उक्षणो रुद्रस्य मर्या असुरा अरेपसः|	they spring to birth the lofty ones the bulls of heaven divine the youths of rudra free from spot and stain.
पावकासः शुचयः सूर्या इव सत्वानो न दरप्सिनोघोरवर्पसः|	the purifiers shining brightly even as suns awful of form like giants scattering raindrops down.
युवानो रुद्रा अजरा अभोग्घनो ववक्षुरध्रिगावः पर्वता इव|	young rudras demonslayers never growing old they have waxed even as mountains irresistible.
दर्ळ्हा चिद विश्वा भुवनानि पार्थिवा पर चयावयन्तिदिव्यानि मज्मना|	they make all beings tremble with their mighty strength even the very strongest both of earth and heaven.
चित्रैरञ्जिभिर्वपुषे वयञ्जते वक्षस्सु रुक्मानधि येतिरे शुभे|	with glittering ornaments they deck them forth for show for beauty on their breasts they bind their chains of gold.
अंसेष्वेषां नि मिम्र्क्षुर रष्टयः साकं जज्ञिरे सवधया दिवो नरः|	the lances on their shoulders pound to pieces they were born together of themselves the men of heaven.
ईशानक्र्तो धुनयो रिशादसो वातान विद्युतस्तविषीभिरक्रत|	loud roarers giving strength devourers of the foe they make the winds they make the lightnings with their powers.
दुहन्त्यूधर्दिव्यानि धूतयो भूमिं पिन्वन्ति पयसापरिज्रयः|	the restless shakers drain the udders of the sky and ever wandering round fill the earth full with milk.
पिन्वन्त्यपो मरुतः सुदानवः पयो घर्तवद विदथेष्वाभुवः|	the bounteous maruts with the fatness dropping milk fill full the waters which avail in solemn rites.
अत्यं न मिहे वि नयन्ति वाजिनमुत्सं दुहन्ति सतनयन्तमक्षितम|	they lead as twere the strong horse forth that it may rain they milk the thundering the neverfailing spring.
महिषासो मायिनश्चित्रभानवो गिरयो न सवतवसो रघुष्यदः|	mighty with wondrous power and marvellously bright selfstrong like mountains ye glide swiftly on your way.
मर्गा इव हस्तिनः खादथा वना यदारुणीषु तविषीरयुग्ध्वम|	like the wild elephants ye eat the forests up when ye assume your strength among the bright red flames.
सिंहा इव नानदति परचेतसः पिशा इव सुपिशो विश्ववेदसः|	exceeding wise they roar like lions mightily they allpossessing are beauteous as antelopes.
कषपो जिन्वन्तः पर्षतीभिर रष्टिभिः समित सबाधः शवसाहिमन्यवः|	stirring the darkness with lances and spotted deer combined as priests with serpents fury through their might.
रोदसी आ वदता गणश्रियो नर्षाचः शूराः शवसाहिमन्यवः|	heroes who march in companies befriending man with serpents ire through strength ye greet the earth and heaven.
आ वन्धुरेष्वमतिर्न दर्शता विद्युन न तस्थौ मरुतो रथेषु वः|	upon the seats o maruts of your chariots upon the cars stands lightning visible as light.
विश्ववेदसो रयिभिः समोकसः सम्मिश्लासस्तविषीभिर्विरप्शिनः|	lords of all riches dwelling in the home of wealth endowed with mighty vigour singers loud of voice.
अस्तार इषुं दधिरे गभस्त्योरनन्तशुष्मा वर्षखादयो नरः|	heroes of powers infinite armed with strong mens rings the archers they have laid the arrow on their arms.
हिरण्ययेभिः पविभिः पयोव्र्ध उज्जिघ्नन्त आपथ्यो न पर्वतान|	they who with golden fellies make the rain increase drive forward the big clouds like wanderers on the way.
मखा अयासः सवस्र्तो धरुवच्युतो दुध्रक्र्तो मरुतो भराजद्र्ष्टयः|	selfmoving brisk unwearied they oerthrow the firm the maruts with bright lances make all things to reel.
घर्षुं पावकं वनिनं विचर्षणिं रुद्रस्य सूनुं हवसा गर्णीमसि|	the progeny of rudra we invoke with prayer the brisk the bright the worshipful the active ones.
रजस्तुरं तवसं मारुतं गणं रजीषिणंव्र्षणं सश्चत शरिये|	to the strong band of maruts cleave for happiness the chasers of the sky impetuous vigorous.
पर नू स मर्तः शवसा जनानति तस्थौ व ऊती मरुतो यमावत|	maruts the man whom ye have guarded with your help he verily in strength surpasseth all mankind.
अर्वद्भिर्वजं भरते धना नर्भिराप्र्छ्यंक्रतुमा कषेति पुष्यति|	spoil with his steeds he gaineth treasure with his men he winneth honourable strength and prospereth.
चर्क्र्त्यं मरुतः पर्त्सु दुष्टरं दयुमन्तं शुष्मं मघवत्सु धत्तन|	o maruts to the worshippers give glorious strength invincible in battle brilliant bringing wealth.
धनस्प्र्तमुक्थ्यं विश्वचर्षणिं तोकं पुष्येम तनयं शतं हिमः|	praiseworthy known to all men may we foster well during a hundred winters son and progeny.
नू षठिरं मरुतो वीरवन्तं रतीषाहं रयिमस्मासु धत्त|	will ye then o ye maruts grant us riches durable rich in men defying onslaught.
सहस्रिणं शतिनं शूशुवांसं परातर मक्षू धियावसुर जगम्यात|	a hundred thousandfold ever increasing may he enriched with prayer come soon and early.
कतरा पूर्वा कतरापरायोः कथा जाते कवयः को वि वेद|	whether of these is elder whether later how were they born who knoweth it ye sages.
विश्वं तमना बिभ्र्तो यद ध नाम वि वर्तेते अहनी चक्रियेव|	these of themselves support all things existing as on a car the day and night roll onward.
भूरिं दवे अचरन्ती चरन्तं पद्वन्तं गर्भमपदी दधाते|	the twain uphold though motionless and footless a widespread offspring having feet and moving.
नित्यं न सूनुं पित्रोरुपस्थे दयावा रक्षतं पर्थिवी नो अभ्वात|	like your own son upon his parents bosom protect us heaven and earth from fearful danger.
अनेहो दात्रमदितेरनर्वं हुवे सवर्वदवधं नमस्वत|	i call for aditis unrivalled bounty perfect celestial deathless meet for worship.
तद रोदसी जनयतं जरित्रे दयावा|	produce this ye twain worlds for him who lauds you protect us heaven and earth from fearful danger.
अतप्यमाने अवसावन्ती अनु षयाम रोदसी देवपुत्रे|	may we be close to both the worlds who suffer no pain parents of gods who aid with favour.
उभे देवानामुभयेभिरह्नां दयावा|	both mid the gods with day and night alternate protect us heaven and earth from fearful danger.
संगछमाने युवती समन्ते सवसारा जामी पित्रोरुपस्थे|	faring together young with meeting limits twin sisters lying in their parents bosom.
अभिजिघ्रन्ती भुवनस्य नाभिं दयावा|	kissing the centre of the world together protect us heaven and earth from fearful danger.
उर्वी सद्मनी बर्हती रतेन हुवे देवानामवसा जनित्री|	duly i call the two wide seats the mighty the general parents with the gods protection.
दधाते ये अम्र्तं सुप्रतीके दयावा|	who beautiful to look on make the nectar protect us heaven and earth from fearful danger.
उर्वी पर्थ्वी बहुले दूरेन्ते उप बरुवे नमसा यज्ञे अस्मिन|	wide vast and manifold whose bounds are distantthese reverent i address at this our worship.
दधाते ये सुभगे सुप्रतूर्ती दयावा|	the blessed pair victorious allsustaining protect us heaven and earth from fearful danger.
देवान वा यच्चक्र्मा कच्चिदागः सखायं वा सदमिज्जास्पतिं वा|	what sin we have at any time committed against the gods our friend our houses chieftain.
इयं धीर्भूया अवयानमेषां दयावा|	thereof may this our hymn be expiation protect us heaven and earth from fearful danger.
उभा शंसा नर्या मामविष्टामुभे मामूती अवसा सचेताम|	may both these friends of man who bless preserve me may they attend me with their help and favour.
भूरि चिदर्यः सुदास्तरायेषा मदन्त इषयेम देवाः|	enrich the man more liberal than the godless may we ye gods be strong with food rejoicing.
रतं दिवे तदवोचं पर्थिव्या अभिश्रावाय परथमं सुमेधाः|	endowed with understanding i have uttered this truth for all to hear to earth and heaven.
पातामवद्याद दुरितादभीके पिता माता च रक्षतामवोभिः|	be near us keep us from reproach and trouble father and mother with your help preserve us.
इदं दयावाप्र्थिवी सत्यमस्तु पितर्मातर्यदिहोपब्रुवे वाम|	be this my prayer fulfilled o earth and heaven wherewith father and mother i address you.
भूतं देवानामवमे अवोभिर्विद्या|	nearest of gods be ye with your protection may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
तरिमूर्धानं सप्तरश्मिं गर्णीषेअनूनमग्निं पित्रोरुपस्थे|	i laud the sevenrayed the tripleheaded agni allperfect in his parents bosom.
निषत्तमस्य चरतो धरुवस्य विश्वा दिवो रोचनापप्रिवांसम|	sunk in the lap of all that moves and moves not him who hath filled all luminous realms of heaven.
उक्षा महानभि ववक्ष एने अजरस्तस्थावितूतिर्र्ष्वः|	as a great steer he grew to these his parents sublime he stands untouched by eld farreaching.
उर्व्याः पदो नि दधाति सानौ रिहन्त्यूधो अरुषासो अस्य|	he plants his footsteps on the lofty ridges of the broad earth his red flames lick the udder.
समानं वत्समभि संचरन्ती विष्वग धेनू वि चरतः सुमेके|	coming together to their common youngling both cows fairshaped spread forth in all directions.
अनपव्र्ज्यानध्वनो मिमाने विश्वान केतानधि महोदधाने|	measuring out the paths that must be travelled entrusting all desires to him the mighty.
धीरासः पदं कवयो नयन्ति नाना हर्दा रक्षमाणा अजुर्यम|	the prudent sages lead him to his dwelling guarding with varied skill the everyouthful.
सिषासन्तः पर्यपश्यन्त सिन्धुमाविरेभ्यो अभवत्सूर्यो नॄन|	longing they turned their eyes unto the river to these the sun of men was manifested.
दिद्र्क्षेण्यः परि काष्ठासु जेन्य ईळेन्यो महो अर्भाय जीवसे|	born noble in the regions aim of all mens eyes to be implored for life by great and small alike.
पुरुत्रा यदभवत सूरहैभ्यो गर्भेभ्यो मघवा विश्वदर्शतः|	far as the wealthy one hath spread himself abroad he is the sire allvisible of this progeny.
पर मंहिष्ठाय बर्हते बर्हद्रये सत्यशुष्माय तवसे मतिं भरे|	to him most liberal lofty lord of lofty wealth verily powerful and strong i bring my hymn.
अपामिव परवणे यस्य दुर्धरं राधो विश्वायुशवसे अपाव्र्तम|	whose checkless bounty as of waters down a slope is spread abroad for all that live to give them strength.
अध ते विश्वमनु हासदिष्टय आपो निम्नेव सवना हविष्मतः|	now all this world for worship shall come after theethe offerers libations like floods to the depth.
यत पर्वते न समशीत हर्यत इन्द्रस्य वज्रः शनथिता हिरण्ययः|	when the wellloved one seems to rest upon the hill the thunderbolt of indra shatterer wrought of gold.
अस्मै भीमाय नमसा समध्वर उषो न शुभ्र आ भरापनीयसे|	to him the terrible most meet for lofty praise like bright dawn now bring gifts with reverence in this rite.
यस्य धाम शरवसे नामेन्द्रियं जयोतिरकारिहरितो नायसे|	whose being for renown yea indrapower and light have been created like bay steeds to move with speed.
इमे त इन्द्र ते वयं पुरुष्टुत ये तवारभ्य चरामसि परभूवसो|	thine indra praised by many excellently rich are we who trusting in thy help draw near to thee.
नहि तवदन्यो गिर्वणो गिरः सघत कषोणीरिव परति नो हर्य तद वचः|	lover of praise none else but thou receives our laud as earth loves all her creatures love thou this our hymn.
भूरि त इन्द्र वीर्यं तव समस्यस्य सतोतुर्मघवन काममा पर्ण|	great is thy power o indra we are thine fulfil o maghavan the wish of this thy worshipper.
अनु ते दयौर्ब्र्हती वीर्यं मम इयं च ते पर्थिवी नेम ओजसे|	after thee lofty heaven hath measured out its strength to thee and to thy power this earth hath bowed itself.
तवं तमिन्द्र पर्वतं महामुरुं वज्रेण वज्रिन पर्वशश्चकर्तिथ|	thou who hast thunder for thy weapon with thy bolt hast shattered into pieces this broad massive cloud.
अवास्र्जो निव्र्ताः सर्तवा अपः सत्रा विश्वं दधिषे केवलं सहः|	thou hast sent down the obstructed floods that they may flow thou hast thine own for ever all victorious might.
य इन्द्राग्नी चित्रतमो रथो वामभि विश्वानि भुवनानि चष्टे|	on that most wondrous car of yours o indra and agni which looks round on all things living.
तेना यातं सरथं तस्थिवांसाथा सोमस्य पिबतं सुतस्य|	take ye your stand and come to us together and drink libations of the flowing soma.
यावदिदं भुवनं विश्वमस्त्युरुव्यचा वरिमता गभीरम|	as vast as all this world is in its compass deep as it is with its farstretching surface.
तावानयं पातवे सोमो अस्त्वरमिन्द्राग्नी मनसे युवभ्याम|	so let this soma be indra and agni made for your drinking till your soul be sated.
चक्राथे हि सध्र्यं नाम भद्रं सध्रीचीना वर्त्रहणाुत सथः|	for ye have won a blessed name together yea with one aim ye strove o vṛtraslayers.
ताविन्द्राग्नी सध्र्यञ्चा निषद्या वर्ष्णः सोमस्य वर्षणा वर्षेथाम|	so indraagni seated here together pour in ye mighty ones the mighty soma.
समिद्धेष्वग्निष्वानजाना यतस्रुचा बर्हिरु तिस्तिराणा|	both stand adorned when fires are duly kindled spreading the sacred grass with lifted ladles.
तीव्रैः सोमैः परिषिक्तेभिरर्वागेन्द्राग्नी सौमनसाय यातम|	drawn by strong soma juice poured forth around us come indraagni and display your favour.
यानीन्द्राग्नी चक्रथुर्वीर्याणि यानि रूपाण्युत वर्ष्ण्यानि|	the brave deeds ye have done indra and agni the forms ye have displayed and mighty exploits.
या वां परत्नानि सख्या शिवानि तेभिः सोमस्य पिबतं सुतस्य|	the ancient and auspicious bonds of friendshipfor sake of these drink of the flowing soma.
यदब्रवं परथमं वां वर्णानोअयं सोमो असुरैर्नो विहव्यः|	as first i said when choosing you in battle we must contend with asuras for this soma.
तां सत्यां शरद्धामभ्या हि यातमथा सोमस्य पिबतं सुतस्य|	so came ye unto this my true conviction and drank libations of the flowing soma.
यदिन्द्राग्नी मदथः सवे दुरोणे यद बरह्मणि राजनि वायजत्रा|	if in your dwelling or with prince or brahman ye indraagni holy ones rejoice you.
अतः परि वर्षणावा हि यातमथा सोमस्य पिबतं सुतस्य|	even from thence ye mighty lords come hither and drink libation of the flowing soma.
यदिन्द्राग्नी यदुषु तुर्वशेषु यद दरुह्युष्वनुषु पूरुषु सथः|	if with the yadus turvaśas ye sojourn with druhyus anus pūrus indraagni.
अतः|	even from thence ye mighty lords come hither and drink libations of the flowing soma.
यदिन्द्राग्नी अवमस्यां पर्थिव्यां मध्यमस्यां परमस्यामुत सथः|	whether o indraagni ye be dwelling in lowest earth in central or in highest.
अतः|	even from thence ye mighty lords come hither and drink libations of the flowing soma.
यदिन्द्राग्नी परमस्यां पर्थिव्यां मध्यमस्यामवमस्यामुत सथः|	whether o indraagni ye be dwelling in highest earth in central or in lowest.
अतः|	even from thence ye mighty lords come hither and drink libations of the flowing soma.
यदिन्द्राग्नी दिवि षठो यत पर्थिव्यां यत पर्वतेष्वोषधीष्वप्सु|	whether ye be in heaven o indraagni on earth on mountains in the herbs or waters.
अतः|	even from thence ye mighty lords come hither and drink libations of the flowing soma.
यदिन्द्राग्नी उदिता सूर्यस्य मध्ये दिवः सवधया मादयेथे|	if when the sun to the midheaven hath mounted ye take delight in food o indraagni.
अतः|	even from thence ye mighty lords come hither and drink libations of the flowing soma.
एवेन्द्राग्नी पपिवांसा सुतस्य विश्वास्मभ्यं सं जयतन्धनानि|	thus having drunk your fill of our libation win us all kinds of wealth indra and agni.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
यजामहे वां महः सजोषा हव्येभिर्मित्रावरुणा नमोभिः|	we worship with our reverence and oblations you mitra varuṇa accordant mighty.
घर्तैर्घ्र्तस्नू अध यद वामस्मे अध्वर्यवो न धीतिभिर्भरन्ति|	so that with us ye twain whose backs are sprinkled with oil the priests with oil and hymns support you.
परस्तुतिर्वां धाम न परयुक्तिरयामि मित्रावरुणा सुव्र्क्तिः|	your praise is like a mighty power an impulse to you twain gods a wellformed hymn is offered.
अनक्ति यद वां विदथेषु होता सुम्नं वां सूरिर्व्र्षणावियक्षन|	as the priest decks yon strong ones in assemblies and the prince fain to worship you for blessings.
पीपाय धेनुरदितिर्र्ताय जनाय मित्रावरुणा हविर्दे|	o mitravaruṇa aditi the milchcow streams for the rite for folk who bring oblation.
हिनोति यद वां विदथे सपर्यन स रातहव्यो मानुषो न होता|	when in the assembly he who worships moves you like to a human priest with gifts presented.
उत वां विक्षु मद्यास्वन्धो गाव आपश्च पीपयन्त देवीः|	so may the kine and heavenly waters pour you sweet drink in families that make you joyful.
उतो नो अस्य पूर्व्यः पतिर्दन वीतं पातं पयस उस्रियायाः|	of this may he the ancient houselord give us enjoy drink of the milk the cow provideth.
अनर्वाणं वर्षभं मन्द्रजिह्वं बर्हस्पतिं वर्धया नव्यमर्कैः|	glorify thou bṛhaspati the scatheless who must be praised with hymns sweettongued and mighty.
गाथान्यः सुरुचो यस्य देवा आश्र्ण्वन्ति नवमानस्य मर्ताः|	to whom as leader of the song resplendent worthy of lauds both gods and mortals listen.
तं रत्विया उप वाचः सचन्ते सर्गो न यो देवयतामसर्जि|	on him wait songs according to the season even as a stream of pious men set moving.
बर्हस्पतिः स हयञ्जो वरांसि विभ्वाभवत सं रते मातरिश्वा|	bṛhaspatifor he laid out the expanseswas at the sacrifice vast mātariśvan.
उपस्तुतिं नमस उद्यतिं च शलोकं यंसत सवितेव पर बाहू|	the praise the verse that offers adoration may he bring forth as the sun sends his arms out.
अस्य करत्वाहन्यो यो अस्ति मर्गो न भीमो अरक्षसस्तुविष्मान|	he who gives daily light through this gods wisdom strong as a dread wild beast and inoffensive.
अस्य शलोको दिवीयते पर्थिव्यामत्यो न यंसद यक्षभ्र्द विचेताः|	his song of praise pervades the earth and heaven let the wise worshipper draw it like a courser.
मर्गाणां न हेतयो यन्ति चेमा बर्हस्पतेरहिमायानभि दयून|	these of bṛhaspati like hunters arrows go to the skies that change their hue like serpents.
ये तवा देवोस्रिकं मन्यमानाः पापा भद्रमुपजीवन्ति पज्राः|	those god who count thee as a worthless bullock and wealthy sinners live on thee the bounteous.
न दूढ्ये अनु ददासि वामं बर्हस्पते चयस इत पियारुम|	on fools like these no blessing thou bestowest bṛhaspati thou punishest the spiteful.
सुप्रैतुः सूयवसो न पन्था दुर्नियन्तुः परिप्रीतो न मित्रः|	like a fair path is he where grass is pleasant though hard to win a friend beloved most early.
अनर्वाणो अभि ये चक्षते नोअपीव्र्ता अपोर्णुवन्तो अस्थुः|	those who unharmed by enemies behold us while they would make them bare stood closely compassed.
सं यं सतुभोअवनयो न यन्ति समुद्रं न सरवतो रोधचक्राः|	he to whom songs of praise go forth like torrents as rivers eddying under banks flow seaward.
स विद्वानुभयं चष्टे अन्तर्ब्र्हस्पतिस्तर आपश्च गर्ध्रः|	bṛhaspati the wise the eager closely looks upon both the waters and the vessel.
एवा महस्तुविजातस्तुविष्मान बर्हस्पतिर्व्र्षभो धायि देवः|	so hath bṛhaspati great strong and mighty the god exceeding powerful been brought hither.
स न सतुतो वीरवद धातु गोमद वि|	may he thus lauded give us kine and horses may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
अबोध्यग्निर्ज्म उदेति सूर्यो वयुषाश्चन्द्रा मह्यावो अर्चिषा|	agni is wakened sūrya riseth from the earth mighty refulgent dawn hath shone with all her light.
आयुक्षातामश्विना यातवे रथं परासावीद देवः सविता जगत पर्थक|	the aśvins have equipped their chariot for the course god savitar hath moved the folk in sundry ways.
यद युञ्जाथे वर्षणमश्विना रथं घर्तेन नो मधुना कषत्रमुक्षतम|	when aśvins ye equip your very mighty car bedew ye twain our power with honey and with oil.
अस्माकं बरह्म पर्तनासु जिन्वतं वयं धना शूरसाता भजेमहि|	to our devotion give victorious strength in war may we win riches in the heroes strife for spoil.
अर्वां तरिचक्रो मधुवाहनो रथो जीराश्वो अश्विनोर्यातु सुष्टुतः|	nigh to us come the aśvins lauded threewheeled car the car laden with meath and drawn by fleetfoot steeds.
तरिवन्धुरो मघवा विश्वसौभगः शं न आ वक्षद दविपदे चतुष्पदे|	threeseated opulent bestowing all delight may it bring weal to us to cattle and to men.
आ न ऊर्जं वहतमश्विना युवं मधुमत्या नः कशया मिमिक्षतम|	bring hither nourishment for us ye aśvins twain sprinkle us with your whip that drops with honeydew.
परायुस्तारिष्टं नी रपांसि मर्क्षतं सेधतं दवेषो भवतं सचाभुवा|	prolong our days of life wipe out our trespasses destroy our foes be our companions and our friends.
युवं ह गर्भं जगतीषु धत्थो युवं विश्वेषु भुवनेष्वन्तः|	ye store the germ of life in female creatures ye lay it up within all living beings.
युवमग्निं च वर्षणावपश्च वनस्पतीन्रश्विनावैरयेथाम|	ye have sent forth o aśvins passing mighty the fire the sovrans of the wood the waters.
युवं ह सथो भिषजा भेषजेभिरथो ह सथो रथ्या राथ्येभिः|	leeches are ye with medicines to heal us and charioteers are ye with skill in driving.
अथो ह कषत्रमधि धत्थ उग्रा यो वां हविष्मान्मनसा ददाश|	ye strong give sway to him who brings oblation and with his heart pours out his gift before you.
इमा रुद्राय तवसे कपर्दिने कषयद्वीराय पर भरामहे मतीः|	to the strong rudra bring we these our songs of praise to him the lord of heroes with the braided hair.
यथा शमसद दविपदे चतुष्पदे विश्वं पुष्टंग्रामे अस्मिन्ननातुरम|	that it be well with all our cattle and our men that in this village all be healthy and wellfed.
मर्ळा नो रुद्रोत नो मयस कर्धि कषयद्वीराय नमसा विधेमते|	be gracious unto us o rudra bring us joy thee lord of heroes thee with reverence will we serve.
यच्छं च योश्च मनुरायेजे पिता तदश्याम तवरुद्र परणीतिषु|	whatever health and strength our father manu won by sacrifice may we under thy guidance gain.
अश्याम ते सुमतिं देवयज्यया कषयद्वीरस्य तव रुद्र मीढ्वः|	by worship of the gods may we o bounteous one o rudra gain thy grace ruler of valiant men.
सुम्नायन्निद विशो अस्माकमा चरारिष्टवीरा जुहवाम ते हविः|	come to our families bringing them bliss may we whose heroes are uninjured bring thee sacred gifts.
तवेषं वयं रुद्रं यज्ञसाधं वङकुं कविमवसे निह्वयामहे|	hither we call for aid the wise the wanderer impetuous rudra perfecter of sacrifice.
आरे अस्मद दैव्यं हेळो अस्यतु सुमतिमिद वयमस्या वर्णीमहे|	may he repel from us the anger of the gods verily we desire his favourable grace.
दिवो वराहमरुषं कपर्दिनं तवेषं रूपं नमसा निह्वयामहे|	him with the braided hair we call with reverence down the wildboar of the sky the red the dazzling shape.
हस्ते बिभ्रद भेषजा वार्याणि शर्म वर्म छर्दिरस्मभ्यं यंसत|	may he his hand filled full of sovran medicines grant us protection shelter and a home secure.
इदं पित्रे मरुतामुच्यते वचः सवादोः सवादीयो रुद्राय वर्धनम|	to him the maruts father is this hymn addressed to strengthen rudras might a song more sweet than sweet.
रास्वा च नो अम्र्त मर्तभोजनं तमने तोकाय तनयाय मर्ळ|	grant us immortal one the food which mortals eat be gracious unto me my seed my progeny.
मा नो महान्तमुत मा नो अर्भकं मा न उक्षन्तमुत मान उक्षितम|	o rudra harm not either great or small of us harm not the growing boy harm not the fullgrown man.
मा नो वधीः पितरं मोत मातरं मा नः परियास्तन्वो रुद्र रीरिषः|	slay not a sire among us slay no mother here and to our own dear bodies rudra do not harm.
मा नस्तोके तनये मा न आयौ मा नो गोषु मा नो अश्वेषुरीरिषः|	harm us not rudra in our seed and progeny harm us not in the living nor in cows or steeds.
वीरान मा नो रुद्र भामितो वधीर्हविष्मन्तःसदमित तवा हवामहे|	slay not our heroes in the fury of thy wrath bringing oblations evermore we call to thee.
उप ते सतोमान पशुपा इवाकरं रास्वा पितर्मरुतां सुम्नमस्मे|	even as a herdsman i have brought thee hymns of praise o father of the maruts give us happiness.
भद्रा हि ते सुमतिर्म्र्ळयत्तमाथा वयमव इत्ते वर्णीमहे|	blessed is thy most favouring benevolence so verily do we desire thy saving help.
आरे ते गोघ्नमुत पूरुषघ्नं कषयद्वीर सुम्नमस्मे तेस्तु|	far be thy dart that killeth men or cattle thy bliss be with us o thou lord of heroes.
मर्ळा च नो अधि च बरूहि देवाधा च नः शर्म यछद्विबर्हाः|	be gracious unto us o god and bless us and then vouchsafe us doublystrong protection.
अवोचाम नमो अस्मा अवस्यवः शर्णोतु नो हवं रुद्रो मरुत्वान|	we seeking help have spoken and adored him may rudra girt by maruts hear our calling.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
का त उपेतिर्मनसो वराय भुवदग्ने शन्तमा का मनीषा|	how may the mind draw nigh to please thee agni what hymn of praise shall bring us greatest blessing.
को वा यज्ञैः परि दक्षं त आप केन वा ते मनसादाशेम|	or who hath gained thy power by sacrifices or with what mind shall we bring thee oblations.
एह्यग्न इह होता नि षीदादब्धः सु पुरेता भवा नः|	come hither agni sit thee down as hotar be thou who never wast deceived our leader.
अवतां तवा रोदसी विश्वमिन्वे यजा महे सौमनसाय देवान|	may heaven and earth the allpervading love thee worship the gods to win for us their favour.
पर सु विश्वान रक्षसो धक्ष्यग्ने भवा यज्ञानामभिशस्तिपावा|	burn thou up all the rākṣasas o agni ward thou off curses from our sacrifices.
अथा वह सोमपतिं हरिभ्यामातिथ्यमस्मै चक्र्मा सुदाव्ने|	bring hither with his bays the lord of soma here is glad welcome for the bounteous giver.
परजावता वचसा वह्निरासा च हुवे नि च सत्सीह देवैः|	thou priest with lip and voice that bring us children hast been invoked here with the gods be seated.
वेषि होत्रमुत पोत्रं यजत्र बोधि परयन्तर्जनितर्वसूनाम|	thine is the task of cleanser and presenter waken us wealthbestower and producer.
यथा विप्रस्य मनुषो हविर्भिर्देवानयजः कविभिः कविः सन|	as with oblations of the priestly manus thou worshippedst the gods a sage with sages.
एवा होतः सत्यतर तवमद्याग्ने मन्द्रया जुह्वा यजस्व|	so now o truthfullest invoker agni worship this day with joybestowing ladle.
वसिष्वा हि मियेध्य वस्त्राण्यूर्जां पते|	o worthy of oblation lord of prospering powers assume thy robes.
सेमं नो अध्वरं यज|	and offer this our sacrifice.
नि नो होता वरेण्यः सदा यविष्ठ मन्मभिः|	sit ever to be chosen as our priest most youthful through our hymns.
अग्ने दिवित्मता वचः|	o agni through our heavenly word.
आ नि षमा सूनवे पितापिर्यजत्यापये|	for here a father for his son kinsman for kinsman worshippeth.
सखा सख्ये वरेण्यः|	and friend choiceworthy for his friend.
आ नो बर्ही रिशादसो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	here let the foedestroyers sit varuṇa mitra aryaman.
सीदन्तु मनुषो यथा|	like men upon our sacred grass.
पूर्व्य होतरस्य नो मन्दस्व सख्यस्य च|	o ancient herald be thou glad in this our rite and fellowship.
इमा उ षु शरुधी गिरः|	hearken thou well to these our songs.
यच्चिद धि शश्वता तना देवंदेवं यजामहे|	whateer in this perpetual course we sacrifice to god and god.
तवे इद्धूयते हविः|	that gift is offered up in thee.
परियो नो अस्तु विश्पतिर्होता मन्द्रो वरेण्यः|	may he be our dear household lord priest pleasant and choiceworthy may.
परियाः सवग्नयो वयम|	we with bright fires be dear to him.
सवग्नयो हि वार्यं देवासो दधिरे च नः|	the gods adored with brilliant fires have granted precious wealth to us.
सवग्नयो मनामहे|	so with bright fires we pray to thee.
अथा न उभयेषामम्र्त मर्त्यानाम|	and o immortal one so may the eulogies of mortal men.
मिथः सन्तु परशस्तयः|	belong to us and thee alike.
विश्वेभिरग्ने अग्निभिरिमं यज्ञमिदं वचः|	with all thy fires o agni find pleasure in this our sacrifice.
चनो धाः सहसो यहो|	and this our speech o son of strength.
रयिर्न चित्रा सूरो न सन्द्र्गायुर्न पराणो नित्यो नसूनुः|	like the suns glance like wealth of varied sort like breath which is the life like ones own son.
तक्वा न भूर्णिर्वना सिषक्ति पयो न धेनुः शुचिर्विभावा|	like a swift bird a cow who yields her milk pure and refulgent to the wood he speeds.
दाधार कषेममोको न रण्वो यवो न पक्वो जेता जनानाम|	he offers safety like a pleasant home like ripened corn the conqueror of men.
रषिर्न सतुभ्वा विक्षु परशस्तो वाजी न परीतो वयोदधति|	like a seer lauding famed among the folk like a steed friendly he vouchsafes us power.
दुरोकशोचिः करतुर्न नित्यो जायेव योनावरं विश्वस्मै|	with flame insatiate like eternal might caring for each one like a dame at home.
चित्रो यदभ्राट छवेतो न विक्षु रथो न रुक्मी तवेषः समत्सु|	bright when he shines forth whitish mid the folk like a car golddecked thundering to the fight.
सेनेव सर्ष्टामं दधात्यस्तुर्न दिद्युत तवेषप्रतीका|	he strikes with terror like a dart shot forth een like an archers arrow tipped with flame.
यमो ह जातो यमो जनित्वं जारः कनीनां पतिर्जनीनाम|	master of present and of future life the maidens lover and the matrons lord.
तं वश्चराथा वयं वसत्यास्तं न गावो नक्षन्त इद्धम|	to him lead all your ways may we attain the kindled god as cows their home at eve.
सिन्धुर्न कषोदः पर नीचीरैनोन नवन्त गावः सवर्द्र्शीके|	he drives the flames below as floods their swell the rays rise up to the fair place of heaven.
महश्चित तवमिन्द्र यत एतान महश्चिदसि तयजसो वरूता|	as indra from great treason thou protectest yea from great treachery these who approach us.
स नो वेधो मरुतां चिकित्वान सुम्ना वनुष्व तव हि परेष्ठा|	so marking well controller of the maruts grant us their blessings for they are thy dearest.
अयुज्रन त इन्द्र विश्वक्र्ष्टीर्विदानासो निष्षिधो मर्त्यत्रा|	the various doings of all mortal people by thee are ordered in thy wisdom indra.
मरुतां पर्त्सुतिर्हासमाना सवर्मीळ्हस्य परधनस्य सातौ|	the host of maruts goeth forth exulting to win the lightbestowing spoil of battle.
अम्यक सा त इन्द्र रष्टिरस्मे सनेम्यभ्वं मरुतो जुनन्ति|	that spear of thine sat firm for us o indra the maruts set their whole dread power in motion.
अग्निश्चिद धि षमातसे शुशुक्वानापो न दवीपं दधतिप्रयांसि|	een agni shines resplendent in the brushwood the viands hold him as floods hold an island.
तवं तू न इन्द्र तं रयिं दा ओजिष्ठया दक्षिणयेव रातिम|	vouchsafe us now that opulence o indra as guerdon won by mightiest donation.
सतुतश्च यास्ते चकनन्त वायो सतनं न मध्वःपीपयन्त वाजैः|	may hymns that please thee cause the breast of vāyu to swell as with the meads refreshing sweetness.
तवे राय इन्द्र तोशतमाः परणेतारः कस्य चिद रतायोः|	with thee o indra are most bounteous riches that further every one who lives uprightly.
ते षु णो मरुतो मर्ळयन्तु ये समा पुरा गातूयन्तीव देवाः|	now may these maruts show us lovingkindness gods who of old were ever prompt to help us.
परति पर याहीन्द्र मीळ्हुषो नॄन महः पार्थिवे सदने यतस्व|	bring forth the men who rain down boons o indra exert thee in the great terrestrial region.
अध यदेषां पर्थुबुध्नास एतास्तीर्थे नार्यः पौंस्यानि तस्थुः|	for their broadchested speckled deer are standing like a kings armies on the field of battle.
परति घोराणामेतानामयासां मरुतां शर्ण्व आयतामुपब्दिः|	heard is the roar of the advancing maruts terrific glittering and swiftly moving.
ये मर्त्यं पर्तनायन्तमूमैर्र्णावानं न पतयन्त सर्गैः|	who with their rush oerthrow as twere a sinner the mortal who would fight with those who love him.
तवं मानेभ्य इन्द्र विश्वजन्या रदा मरुद्भिः शुरुधो गोग्राः|	give to the mānas indra with maruts gifts universal gifts of cattle foremost.
सतवानेभि सतवसे देव देवैर्विद्यामेषं वर्जनं जीरदानुम|	thou god art praised with gods who must be lauded may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
नयू षु वाचं पर महे भरामहे गिर इन्द्राय सदने विवस्वतः|	we will present fair praise unto the mighty one our hymns to indra in vivasvāns dwellingplace.
नू चिद धि रत्नं ससतामिवाविदन न दुष्टुतिर्द्रविणोदेषु शस्यते|	for he hath neer found wealth in those who seem to sleep those who give wealth to men accept no paltry praise.
दुरो अश्वस्य दुर इन्द्र गोरसि दुरो यवस्य वसुन इनस पतिः|	giver of horses indra giver thou of kine giver of barley thou art lord and guard of wealth.
शिक्षानरः परदिवो अकामकर्शनः सखा सखिभ्यस्तमिदं गर्णीमसि|	mans helper from of old not disappointing hope friend of our friends to thee as such we sing this praise.
शचीव इन्द्र पुरुक्र्द दयुमत्तम तवेदिदमभितश्चेकिते वसु|	indra most splendid powerful rich in mighty deeds this treasure spread around is known to be thine own.
अतः संग्र्भ्याभिभूत आ भर मा तवायतो जरितुः काममूनयीः|	gather therefrom o conqueror and bring to us fail not the hope of him who loves and sings to thee.
एभिर्द्युभिः सुमना एभिरिन्दुभिर्निरुन्धानो अमतिं गोभिरश्विना|	well pleased with these bright flames and with these soma drops take thou away our poverty with seeds and kine.
इन्द्रेण दस्युं दरयन्त इन्दुभिर्युतद्वेषसःसमिषा रभेमहि|	with indra scattering the dasyu through these drops freed from their hate may we obtain abundant food.
समिन्द्र राया समिषा रभेमहि सं वाजेभिः पुरुश्चन्द्रैरभिद्युभिः|	let us obtain o indra plenteous wealth and food with strength exceeding glorious shining to the sky.
सं देव्या परमत्या वीरशुष्मया गोग्रयाश्वावत्या रभेमहि|	may we obtain the goddess providence the strength of heroes special source of cattle rich in steeds.
ते तवा मदा अमदन तानि वर्ष्ण्या ते सोमासो वर्त्रहत्येषु सत्पते|	these our libations strengthinspiring soma draughts gladdened thee in the fight with vṛtra hero lord.
यत कारवे दश वर्त्राण्यप्रति बर्हिष्मते नि सहस्राणि बर्हयः|	what time thou slewest for the singer with trimmed grass ten thousand vṛtras thou resistless in thy might.
युधा युधमुप घेदेषि धर्ष्णुया पुरा पुरं समिदं हंस्योजसा|	thou goest on from fight to fight intrepidly destroying castle after castle here with strength.
नम्या यदिन्द्र सख्या परावति निबर्हयो नमुचिं नाम मायिनम|	thou indra with thy friend who makes the foe bow down slewest from far away the guileful namuci.
तवं करञ्जमुत पर्णयं वधीस्तेजिष्ठयातिथिग्वस्यवर्तनी|	thou hast struck down in death karañja parṇaya in atithigvas very glorious going forth.
तवं शता वङगर्दस्याभिनत पुरोअनानुदः परिषूता रजिश्वना|	unyielding when Ṛjiśvan compassed them with siege thou hast destroyed the hundred forts of vaṅgṛida.
तवमेताञ जनराज्ञो दविर्दशाबन्धुना सुश्रवसोपजग्मुषः|	with alloutstripping chariotwheel o indra thou farfamed hast overthrown the twice ten kings of men.
षष्टिं सहस्रा नवतिं नव शरुतो नि चक्रेण रथ्या दुष्पदाव्र्णक|	with sixty thousand nineandninety followers who came in arms to fight with friendless suśravas.
तवमाविथ सुश्रवसं तवोतिभिस्तव तरामभिरिन्द्र तूर्वयाणम|	thou hast protected suśravas with succour and tūrvayāṇa with thine aid o indra.
तवमस्मै कुत्समतिथिग्वमायुं महे राज्ञे यूने अरन्धनायः|	thou madest kutsa atithigva Āyu subject unto this king the young the mighty.
य उद्र्चीन्द्र देवगोपाः सखायस्ते शिवतमा असाम|	may we protected by the gods hereafter remain thy very prosperous friends o indra.
तवां सतोषाम तवया सुवीरा दराघीय आयुः परतरं दधानाः|	thee we extol enjoying through thy favour life long and joyful and with store of heroes.
आ नो भद्राः करतवो कष्यन्तु विश्वतोअदब्धासो अपरीतास उद्भिदः|	may powers auspicious come to us from every side never deceived unhindered and victorious.
देवा नो यथा सदमिद वर्धे असन्नप्रायुवो रक्षितारो दिवेदिवे|	that the gods ever may be with us for our gain our guardians day by day unceasing in their care.
देवानां भद्रा सुमतिर्र्जूयतां देवानां रातिरभि नोनि वर्तताम|	may the auspicious favour of the gods be ours on us descend the bounty of the righteous gods.
देवानां सख्यमुप सेदिमा वयं देवा न आयुः पर तिरन्तु जीवसे|	the friendship of the gods have we devoutly sought so may the gods extend our life that we may live.
तान पूर्वया निविदा हूमहे वयं भगं मित्रमदितिं दक्षमस्रिधम|	we call them hither with a hymn of olden time bhaga the friendly dakṣa mitra aditi.
अर्यमणं वरुणं सोममश्विना सरस्वतीनः सुभगा मयस करत|	aryaman varuṇa soma the aśvins may sarasvatī auspicious grant felicity.
तन नो वातो मयोभु वातु भेषजं तन माता पर्थिवी तत्पिता दयौः|	may the wind waft to us that pleasant medicine may earth our mother give it and our father heaven.
तद गरावाणः सोमसुतो मयोभुवस्तदश्विना शर्णुतं धिष्ण्या युवम|	and the joygiving stones that press the somas juice aśvins may ye for whom our spirits long hear this.
तमीशानं जगतस्तस्थुषस पतिं धियंजिन्वमवसे हूमहे वयम|	him we invoke for aid who reigns supreme the lord of all that stands or moves inspirer of the soul.
पूषा नो यथा वेदसामसद वर्धे रक्षिता पायुरदब्धः सवस्तये|	that pūṣan may promote the increase of our wealth our keeper and our guard infallible for our good.
सवस्ति न इन्द्रो वर्द्धश्रवाः सवस्ति नः पुषा विश्ववेदाः|	illustrious far and wide may indra prosper us may pūṣan prosper us the master of all wealth.
सवस्ति नस्तार्क्ष्यो अरिष्टनेमिः सवस्ति नो बर्हस्पतिर्दधातु|	may tārkṣya with uninjured fellies prosper us bṛhaspati vouchsafe to us prosperity.
पर्षदश्वा मरुतः पर्श्निमातरः शुभंयावानो विदथेषुजग्मयः|	the maruts sons of pṛśni borne by spotted steeds moving in glory oft visiting holy rites.
अग्निजिह्वा मनवः सूरचक्षसो विश्वे नो देवा अवसा गमन्निह|	sages whose tongue is agni brilliant as the sunhither let all the gods for our protection come.
भद्रं कर्णेभिः शर्णुयाम देवा भद्रं पश्येमाक्षभिर्यजत्राः|	gods may we with our ears listen to what is good and with our eyes see what is good ye holy ones.
सथिरैरङगैस्तुष्टुवांसस्तनूभिर्व्यशेमदेवहितं यदायुः|	with limbs and bodies firm may we extolling you attain the term of life appointed by the gods.
शतमिन नु शरदो अन्ति देवा यत्रा नश्चक्रा जरसं तनूनाम|	a hundred autumns stand before us o ye gods within whose space ye bring our bodies to decay.
पुत्रासो यत्र पितरो भवन्ति मा नो मध्या रीरिषतायुर्गन्तोः|	within whose space our sons become fathers in turn break ye not in the midst our course of fleeting life.
अदितिर्द्यौरदितिरन्तरिक्षमदितिर्माता स पिता स पुत्रः|	aditi is the heaven aditi is midair aditi is the mother and the sire and son.
विश्वे देवा अदितिः पञ्च जना अदितिर्जातमदितिर्जनित्वम|	aditi is all gods aditi fiveclassed men aditi all that hath been born and shall be born.
योनिष ट इन्द्र निषदे अकारि तमा नि षीद सवानो नार्वा|	the altar hath been made for thee to rest on come like a panting courser and be seated.
विमुच्य वयोअवसायाश्वान दोषा वस्तोर्वहीयसः परपित्वे|	loosen thy flying steeds set free thy horses who bear thee swiftly nigh at eve and morning.
ओ तये नर इन्द्रमूतये गुर्नू चित तान सद्यो अध्वनो जगम्यात|	these men have come to indra for assistance shall he not quickly come upon these pathways.
देवासो मन्युं दासस्य शचम्नन ते न आ वक्षन सुविताय वर्णम|	may the gods quell the fury of the dāsa and may they lead our folk to happy fortune.
अव तमन भरते केतवेदा अव तमना भरते फेनमुदन|	he who hath only wish as his possession casts on himself casts foam amid the waters.
कषीरेण सनातः कुयवस्य योषे हते ते सयातां परवणे शिफायाः|	both wives of kuyava in milk have bathed them may they be drowned within the depth of Śiphā.
युयोप नाभिरुपरस्यायोः पर पूर्वाभिस्तिरते राष्टि शूरः|	this hath his kinship checked who lives beside us with ancient streams forth speeds and rules the hero.
अञ्जसी कुलिशी वीरपत्नी पयो हिन्वाना उदभिर्भरन्ते|	añjasī kuliśī and virapatnī delighting him bear milk upon their waters.
परति यत सया नीथादर्शि दस्योरोको नाछा सदनं जानती गात|	soon as this dasyus traces were discovered as she who knows her home he sought the dwelling.
अध समा नो मघवञ्चर्क्र्तादिन मा नो मघेव निष्षपी परा दाः|	now think thou of us maghavan nor cast us away as doth a profligate his treasure.
स तवं न इन्द्र सूर्ये सो अप्स्वनागास्त्व आ भज जीवशंसे|	indra as such give us a share of sunlight of waters sinlessness and reputation.
मान्तरां भुजमा रीरिषो नः शरद्धितं ते महत इन्द्रियाय|	do thou no harm to our yet unborn offspring our trust is in thy mighty indrapower.
अधा मन्ये शरत ते अस्मा अधायि वर्षा चोदस्व महते धनाय|	now we i think in thee as such have trusted lead us on mighty one to ample riches.
मा नो अक्र्ते पुरुहूत योनाविन्द्र कषुध्यद्भ्यो वय आसुतिं दाः|	in no unready house give us o indra invoked of many food and drink when hungry.
मा नो वधीरिन्द्र मा परा दा मा नः परिया भोजनानि पर मोषीः|	slay us not indra do not thou forsake us steal not away the joys which we delight in.
आण्डा मा नो मघवञ्छक्र निर्भेन मा नः पात्रा भेत सहजानुषाणि|	rend not our unborn brood strong lord of bounty our vessels with the life that is within them.
अर्वां एहि सोमकामं तवाहुरयं सुतस्तस्य पिबा मदाय|	come to us they have called thee somalover here is the pressed juice drink thereof for rapture.
उरुव्यचा जथर आ वर्षस्व पितेव नः शर्णुहि हूयमानः|	widelycapacious pour it down within thee and invocated hear us like a father.
इन्द्रस्य नु वीर्याणि पर वोचं यानि चकार परथमानि वज्री|	i will declare the manly deeds of indra the first that he achieved the thunderwielder.
अहन्नहिमन्वपस्ततर्द पर वक्षणा अभिनत पर्वतानाम|	he slew the dragon then disclosed the waters and cleft the channels of the mountain torrents.
अहन्नहिं पर्वते शिश्रियाणं तवष्टास्मै वज्रं सवर्यं ततक्ष|	he slew the dragon lying on the mountain his heavenly bolt of thunder tvaṣṭar fashioned.
वाश्रा इव धेनवः सयन्दमाना अञ्जः समुद्रमव जग्मुरापः|	like lowing kine in rapid flow descending the waters glided downward to the ocean.
वर्षायमाणोअव्र्णीत सोमं तरिकद्रुकेष्वपिबत सुतस्य|	impetuous as a bull he chose the soma and in three sacred beakers drank the juices.
आसायकं मघवादत्त वज्रमहन्नेनं परथमजामहीनाम|	maghavan grasped the thunder for his weapon and smote to death this firstborn of the dragons.
यदिन्द्राहन परथमजामहीनामान मायिनाममिनाः परोत मायाः|	when indra thou hadst slain the dragons firstborn and overcome the charms of the enchanters.
आत सूर्यं जनयन दयामुषासं तादीत्नाशत्रुं न किला विवित्से|	then giving life to sun and dawn and heaven thou foundest not one foe to stand against thee.
अहन वर्त्रं वर्त्रतरं वयंसमिन्द्रो वज्रेण महता वधेन|	indra with his own great and deadly thunder smote into pieces vṛtra worst of vṛtras.
सकन्धांसीव कुलिशेना विव्र्क्णाहिः शयत उपप्र्क पर्थिव्याः|	as trunks of trees what time the axe hath felled them low on the earth so lies the prostrate dragon.
अयोद्धेव दुर्मद आ हि जुह्वे महावीरं तुविबाधं रजीषम|	he like a mad weak warrior challenged indra the great impetuous manyslaying hero.
नातारीदस्य सम्र्तिं वधानां सं रुजानाः पिपिषैन्द्रशत्रुः|	he brooking not the clashing of the weapons crushedindras foethe shattered forts in falling.
अपादहस्तो अप्र्तन्यदिन्द्रमास्य वज्रमधि सानौ जघान|	footless and handless still he challenged indra who smote him with his bolt between the shoulders.
वर्ष्णो वध्रिः परतिमानं बुभूषन पुरुत्रा वर्त्रो अशयद वयस्तः|	emasculate yet claiming manly vigour thus vṛtra lay with scattered limbs dissevered.
नदं न भिन्नममुया शयानं मनो रुहाणा अति यन्त्यापः|	there as he lies like a bankbursting river the waters taking courage flow above him.
याश्चिद वर्त्रो महिना पर्यतिष्ठत तासामहिः पत्सुतःशीर्बभूव|	the dragon lies beneath the feet of torrents which vṛtra with his greatness had encompassed.
नीचावया अभवद वर्त्रपुत्रेन्द्रो अस्या अव वधर्जभार|	then humbled was the strength of vṛtras mother indra hath cast his deadly bolt against her.
उत्तरा सूरधरः पुत्र आसीद दानुः शये सहवत्सा न धेनुः|	the mother was above the son was under and like a cow beside her calf lay danu.
अतिष्ठन्तीनामनिवेशनानां काष्ठानां मध्ये निहितंशरीरम|	rolled in the midst of neverceasing currents flowing without a rest for ever onward.
वर्त्रस्य निण्यं वि चरन्त्यापो दीर्घं तम आशयदिन्द्रशत्रुः|	the waters bear off vṛtras nameless body the foe of indra sank to during darkness.
दासपत्नीरहिगोपा अतिष्ठन निरुद्धा आपः पणिनेव गावः|	guarded by ahi stood the thralls of dāsas the waters stayed like kine held by the robber.
अपां बिलमपिहितं यदासीद वर्त्रं जघन्वानपतद ववार|	but he when he had smitten vṛtra opened the cave wherein the floods had been imprisoned.
अश्व्यो वारो अभवस्तदिन्द्र सर्के यत तवा परत्यहन देव एकः|	a horses tail wast thou when he o indra smote on thy bolt thou god without a second.
अजयो गा अजयः शूर सोममवास्र्जः सर्तवे सप्त सिन्धून|	thou hast won back the kine hast won the soma thou hast let loose to flow the seven rivers.
नास्मै विद्युन न तन्यतुः सिषेध न यां मिहमकिरद धरादुनिं च|	nothing availed him lightning nothing thunder hailstorm or mist which had spread around him.
इन्द्रश्च यद युयुधाते अहिश्चोतापरीभ्यो मघवा वि जिग्ये|	when indra and the dragon strove in battle maghavan gained the victory for ever.
अहेर्यातारं कमपश्य इन्द्र हर्दि यत ते जघ्नुषो भीरगछत|	whom sawest thou to avenge the dragon indra that fear possessed thy heart when thou hadst slain him.
नव च यन नवतिं च सरवन्तीः शयेनो न भीतोतरो रजांसि|	that like a hawk affrighted through the regions thou crossedst nineandninety flowing rivers.
इन्द्रो यातोअवसितस्य राजा शमस्य च शर्ङगिणो वज्रबाहुः|	indra is king of all that moves and moves not of creatures tame and horned the thunderwielder.
सेदु राजा कषयति चर्षणीनामरान न नेमिः परि ता बभूव|	over all living men he rules as sovran containing all as spokes within the felly.
अयं जायत मनुषो धरीमणि होता यजिष्ठ उशिजामनुव्रतमग्निः सवमनु वरतम|	by manus law was born this agni priest most skilled born for the holy work of those who yearn therefore yea born for his own holy work.
विश्वश्रुष्टिः सखीयते रयिरिव शरवस्यते|	all ear to him who seeks his love and wealth to him who strives for fame.
अदब्धो होता नि षददिळस पदे परिवीत इळस पदे|	priest neer deceived he sits in iḷās holy place girt round in iḷās holy place.
तं यज्ञसाधमपि वातयामस्य रतस्य पथा नमसा हविष्मता देवताता हविष्मता|	we call that perfecter of worship by the path or sacrifice with reverence rich in offerings with worship rich in offerings.
स न ऊर्जामुपाभ्र्त्यया कर्पा न जूर्यति|	through presentation of our food he grows not old in this his from.
यं मातरिश्वा मनवे परावतो देवं भाः परावतः|	the god whom mātariśvan brought from far away for manu brought from far away.
एवेन सद्यः पर्येति पार्थिवं मुहुर्गी रेतो वर्षभः कनिक्रदद दधद रेतह कनिक्रदत|	in ordered course forthwith he traverses the earth swiftswallowing bellowing steer bearing the genial seed bearing the seed and bellowing.
शतं चक्षाणो अक्षभिर्देवो वनेषु तुर्वणिः|	observant with a hundred eyes the god is conqueror in the wood.
सदो दधान उपरेषु सानुष्वग्निः परेषु सानुषु|	agni who hath his seat in broad plains here below and in the high lands far away.
स सुक्रतुः पुरोहितो दमे दमेअग्निर्यज्ञस्याध्वरस्य चेतति करत्वा यज्ञस्य चेतति|	that agni wise highpriest in every house takes thought for sacrifice and holy service yea takes thought with mental power for sacrifice.
करत्वा वेधा इषूयते विश्वा जातानि पस्पशे|	disposer he with mental power shows all things unto him who strives.
यतो घर्तश्रीरतिथिरजायत वह्निर्वेधा अजायत|	whence he was born a guest enriched with holy oil born as ordainer and as priest.
करत्वा यदस्य तविषीषु पर्ञ्चतेअग्नेरवेण मरुतां न भोज्येषिराय न भोज्या|	when through his power and in his strong prevailing flames the maruts gladdening boons mingle with agnis roar boons gladdening for the active one.
स हि षमा दानमिन्वति वसूनां च मज्मना|	then he accelerates the gift and by the greatness of his wealth.
स नस्त्रासते दुरितादभिह्रुतः शंसादघादभिह्रुतः|	shall rescue us from overwhelming misery from curse and overwhelming woe.
विश्वो विहाया अरतिर्वसुर्दधे हस्ते दक्षिणे तरणिर्नशिश्रथच्छ्रवस्यया न शिश्रथत|	vast universal good he was made messenger the speeder with his right hand hath not loosed his hold through love of fame not loosed his hold.
विश्वस्मा इदिषुध्यते देवत्रा हव्यमोहिषे|	he bears oblations to the gods for whosoever supplicates.
विश्वस्मा इत सुक्र्ते वारं रण्वत्यग्निर्द्वारा वय रण्वति|	agni bestows a blessing on each pious man and opens wide the doors for him.
स मानुषे वर्जने शन्तमो हितोअग्निर्यज्ञेषु जेन्यो न विश्पतिः परियो यज्ञेषु विश्पतिः|	that agni hath been set most kind in camp of men in sacrifice like a lord victorious like a dear lord in sacred rites.
स हव्या मानुषाणामिळा कर्तानि पत्यते|	his are the oblations of mankind when offered up at iḷās place.
स नस्त्रासते वरुणस्य धूर्तेर्महोदेवस्य धूर्तेः|	he shall preserve us from varuṇas chastisement yea from the great gods chastisement.
अग्निं होतारमीळते वसुधितिं परियं चेतिष्ठमरतिं नयेरिरे हव्यवाहं नयेरिरे|	agni the priest they supplicate to grant them wealth him dear most thoughtful have they made their messenger him offeringbearer have they made.
विश्वायुं विश्ववेदसं होतारं यजतं कविम|	beloved of all who knoweth all the priest the holy one the sage.
देवासो रण्वमवसे वसूयवो गीर्भीरण्वं वसूयवः|	him friend for help the gods when they are fain for wealth him friend with hymns when fain for wealth.
अश्विना यज्वरीरिषो दरवत्पाणी शुभस पती|	ye aśvins rich in treasure lords of splendour having nimble hands.
पुरुभुजाचनस्यतम|	accept the sacrificial food.
अश्विना पुरुदंससा नरा शवीरया धिया|	ye aśvins rich in wondrous deeds ye heroes worthy of our praise.
धिष्ण्या वनतं गिरः|	accept our songs with mighty thought.
दस्रा युवाकवः सुता नासत्या वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	nāsatyas wonderworkers yours are these libations with clipt grass.
आ यातंरुद्रवर्तनी|	come ye whose paths are red with flame.
इन्द्रा याहि चित्रभानो सुता इमे तवायवः|	o indra marvellously bright come these libations long for thee.
अण्वीभिस्तना पूतासः|	thus by fine fingers purified.
इन्द्रा याहि धियेषितो विप्रजूतः सुतावतः|	urged by the holy singer sped by song come indra to the prayers.
उप बरह्माणि वाघतः|	of the libationpouring priest.
इन्द्रा याहि तूतुजान उप बरह्माणि हरिवः|	approach o indra hasting thee lord of bay horses to the prayers.
सुते दधिष्वनश्चनः|	in our libation take delight.
ओमासश्चर्षणीध्र्तो विश्वे देवास आ गत|	ye viśvedevas who protect reward and cherish men approach.
दाश्वांसो दाशुषः सुतम|	your worshippers drinkoffering.
विश्वे देवासो अप्तुरः सुतमा गन्त तूर्णयः|	ye viśvedevas swift at work come hither quickly to the draught.
उस्रा इवस्वसराणि|	as milchkine hasten to their stalls.
विश्वे देवासो अस्रिध एहिमायासो अद्रुहः|	the viśvedevas changing shape like serpents fearless void of guile.
मेधं जुषन्त वह्नयः|	bearers accept the sacred draught.
पावका नः सरस्वती वाजेभिर्वाजिनीवती|	wealthy in spoil enriched with hymns may bright sarasvatī desire.
यज्ञं वष्टु धियावसुः|	with eager love our sacrifice.
चोदयित्री सून्र्तानां चेतन्ती सुमतीनाम|	inciter of all pleasant songs inspirer of all gracious thought.
यज्ञं दधे सरस्वती|	sarasvatī accept our rite.
महो अर्णः सरस्वती पर चेतयति केतुना|	sarasvatī the mighty floodshe with her light illuminates.
धियो विश्वा वि राजति|	she brightens every pious thought.
मित्रं न यं शिम्या गोषु गव्यवः सवाध्यो विदथे अप्सुजीजनन|	heaven and earth trembled at the might and voice of him whom loved and holy one helper of all mankind.
अरेजेतां रोदसी पाजसा गिरा परति परियं यजतं जनुषमवः|	the wise who longed for spoil in fight for kine brought forth with power a friend mid waters at the sacrifice.
यद ध तयद वां पुरुमीळ्हस्य सोमिनः पर मित्रासो न दधिरे सवाभुवः|	as these like friends have done this work for you these prompt servants of purumīlha somaofferer.
अध करतुं विदतं गतुमर्चत उत शरुतं वर्षणा पस्त्यावतः|	give mental power to him who sings the sacred song and hearken strong ones to the master of the house.
आ वां भूषन कषितयो जन्म रोदस्योः परवाच्यं वर्षणा दक्षसे महे|	the folk have glorified your birth from earth and heaven to be extolled ye strong ones for your mighty power.
यदीं रताय भरथो यदर्वते पर होत्रया शिम्य वीथो अध्वरम|	ye when ye bring to singer and the rite enjoy the sacrifice performed with holy praise and strength.
पर सा कषितिरसुर या महि परिय रतावानाव रतमा घोषथो बर्हत|	the people prospers asuras whom ye dearly love ye righteous ones proclaim aloud the holy law.
युवं दिवो बर्हतो दक्षमभुवं गां न धुर्युप युञ्जाथे अपः|	that efficacious power that comes from lofty heaven ye bind unto the work as to the pole an ox.
मही अत्र महिना वारं रण्वथोअरेणवस्तुज आ सद्मन धेनवः|	on this great earth ye send your treasure down with might unstained by dust the crowding kine are in the stalls.
सवरन्ति ता उपरताति सूर्यमा निम्रुच उषसस्तक्ववीरिव|	here in the neighbourhood they cry unto the sun at morning and at evening like swift birds of prey.
आ वं रताय केशिनीरनुषत मित्र यत्र वरुण गातुमर्चथः|	the flames with curling tresses serve your sacrifice whereto ye sing the song mitra and varuṇa.
अव तमन सर्जतं पिन्वतं धियो युवं विप्रस्य मन्मनमिरज्यथः|	send down of your free will prosper our holy songs ye are sole masters of the singers hymn of praise.
यो वां यज्ञैः शशमानो ह दाशति कविर्होता यजति मन्मसाधनः|	whoso with sacrifices toiling brings you gifts and worships sage and priest fulfilling your desire.
उपाह तं गछथो वीथो अध्वरमछा गिरः सुमतिं गन्तमस्मयु|	to him do ye draw nigh and taste his sacrifice come wellinclined to us unto our songs and prayer.
युवां यज्ञैः परथमा गोभिरञ्जत रतावना मनसो नप्रयुक्तिषु|	with sacrifices and with milk they deck you first ye righteous ones as if through stirrings of the mind.
भरन्ति वां मन्मना संयता गिरोअद्र्प्यता मनस रेवदशाथे|	to you they bring their hymns with their collected thought while ye with earnest soul come to us gloriously.
रेवद वयो दधाथे रेवदाशथे नरा मयाभिरितौति महिनम|	rich strength of life is yours ye heroes have obtained through your surpassing powers rich farextending might.
न वं दयावोअहभिर्नोत सिन्धवो न देवत्वं पणयो नानशुर्मघम|	not the past days conjoined with nights not rivers not the paṇis have attained your godhead and your wealth.
वायवा याहि दर्शतेमे सोमा अरंक्र्ताः|	beautiful vāyu come for thee these soma drops have been prepared.
तेषां पाहि शरुधी हवम|	drink of them hearken to our call.
वाय उक्थेभिर्जरन्ते तवामछा जरितारः|	knowing the days with soma juice poured forth the singers glorify.
सुतसोमा अहर्विदः|	thee vāyu with their hymns of praise.
वायो तव परप्र्ञ्चती धेना जिगाति दाशुषे|	vāyu thy penetrating stream goes forth unto the worshipper.
उरूची सोमपीतये|	farspreading for the soma draught.
इन्द्रवायू इमे सुता उप परयोभिरा गतम|	these indravāyu have been shed come for our offered dainties sake.
इन्दवो वामुशन्ति हि|	the drops are yearning for you both.
वायविन्द्रश्च चेतथः सुतानां वाजिनीवसू|	well do ye mark libations ye vāyu and indra rich in spoil.
तावा यातमुप दरवत|	so come ye swiftly hitherward.
वायविन्द्रश्च सुन्वत आ यातमुप निष्क्र्तम|	vāyu and indra come to what the somapresser hath prepared.
मक्ष्वित्था धिया नरा|	soon heroes thus i make my prayer.
मित्रं हुवे पूतदक्षं वरुणं च रिशादसम|	mitra of holy strength i call and foedestroying varuṇa.
धियं घर्ताचीं साधन्ता|	who make the oilfed rite complete.
रतेन मित्रावरुणाव रताव्र्धाव रतस्प्र्शा|	mitra and varuṇa through law lovers and cherishers of law.
करतुं बर्हन्तमाशाथे|	have ye obtained your might power.
कवी नो मित्रावरुणा तुविजाता उरुक्षया|	our sages mitravaruṇa wide dominion strong by birth.
दक्षं दधाते अपसम|	vouchsafe us strength that worketh well.
कथा ते अग्ने शुचयन्त आयोर्ददाशुर्वाजेभिराशुषाणाः|	how agni have the radiant ones aspiring endued thee with the vigour of the living.
उभे यत तोके तनये दधाना रतस्य सामन रणयन्तदेवाः|	so that on both sides fostering seed and offspring the gods may joy in holy laws fulfilment.
बोधा मे अस्य वचसो यविष्ठ मंहिष्ठस्य परभ्र्तस्य सवधावः|	mark this my speech divine one thou most youthful offered to thee by him who gives most freely.
पीयति तवो अनु तवो गर्णाति वन्दारुस्ते तन्वं वन्देग्ने|	one hates thee and another sings thy praises i thine adorer laud thy form o agni.
ये पायवो मामतेयं ते अग्ने पश्यन्तो अन्धं दुरितादरक्षन|	thy guardian rays o agni when they saw him preserved blind māmateya from affliction.
ररक्ष तान सुक्र्तो विश्ववेदा दिप्सन्त इद रिपवो नाह देभुः|	lord of all riches he preserved the pious the foes who fain would harm them did no mischief.
यो नो अग्ने अररिवानघायुररातीवा मर्चयति दवयेन|	the sinful man who worships not o agni who offering not harms us with doubledealing.
मन्त्रो गुरुः पुनरस्तु सो अस्मा अनु मर्क्षीष्ट तन्वं दुरुक्तैः|	be this in turn to him a heavy sentence may he distress himself by his revilings.
उत वा यः सहस्य परविद्वान मर्तो मर्तं मर्चयति दवयेन|	yea when a mortal knowingly o victor injures with double tongue a fellowmortal.
अतः पाहि सतवमान सतुवन्तमग्ने माकिर्नो दुरिताय धायीः|	from him praised agni save thou him that lauds thee bring us not into trouble and affliction.
तयं सु मेषं महया सवर्विदं शतं यस्य सुभ्वः साकमीरते|	i glorify that ram who finds the light of heaven whose hundred noblynatured ones go forth with him.
अत्यं न वाजं हवनस्यदं रथमेन्द्रं वव्र्त्यामवसे सुव्र्क्तिभिः|	with hymns may i turn hither indra to mine aidthe car which like a strong steed hasteth to the call.
स पर्वतो न धरुणेष्वच्युतः सहस्रमूतिस्तविषीषु वाव्र्धे|	like as a mountain on firm basis unremoved he thousandfold protector waxed in mighty strength.
इन्द्रो यद वर्त्रमवधीन नदीव्र्तमुब्जन्नर्णांसिजर्ह्र्षाणो अन्धसा|	when indra joying in the draughts of soma juice forced the clouds slaying vṛtra stayer of their flow.
स हि दवरो दवरिषु वव्र ऊधनि चन्द्रबुध्नो मदव्र्द्धो मनीषिभिः|	for he stays een the stayers spread oer laden cloud rooted in light strengthened in rapture by the wise.
इन्द्रं तमह्वे सवपस्यया धिया मंहिष्ठरातिं स हि पप्रिरन्धसः|	indra with thought with skilled activity i call most liberal giver for he sates him with the juice.
आ यं पर्णन्ति दिवि सद्मबर्हिषः समुद्रं न सुभ्वः सवा अभिष्टयः|	whom those that flow in heaven on sacred grass his own assistants noblynatured fill full like the sea.
तं वर्त्रहत्ये अनु तस्थुरूतयः शुष्मािन्द्रमवाता अह्रुतप्सवः|	beside that indra when he smote down vṛtra stood his helpers straight in form mighty invincible.
अभि सवव्र्ष्टिं मदे अस्य युध्यतो रघ्वीरिव परवणे सस्रुरूतयः|	to him as in wild joy he fought with him who stayed the rain his helpers sped like swift streams down a slope.
इन्द्रो यद वज्री धर्षमाणो अन्धसा भिनद वलस्य परिधीन्रिव तरितः|	when indra thunderarmed made bold by soma draughts as tṛta cleaveth valas fences cleft him through.
परीं घर्णा चरति तित्विषे शवोअपो वर्त्वी रजसो बुध्नमाशयत|	splendour encompassed thee forth shone thy warrior might the rainobstructer lay in midairs lowest deep.
वर्त्रस्य यत परवणे दुर्ग्र्भिश्वनो निजघन्थ हन्वोरिन्द्र तन्यतुम|	what time o indra thou didst cast thy thunder down upon the jaws of vṛitra hard to be restrained.
हरदं न हि तवा नय्र्षन्त्यूर्मयो बरह्माणीन्द्र तव यानि वर्धना|	the hymns which magnify thee indra reach to thee even as waterbrooks flow down and fill the lake.
तवष्टा चित ते युज्यं वाव्र्धे शवस्ततक्ष वज्रमभिभूत्योजसम|	tvaṣṭar gave yet more force to thine appropriate strength and forged thy thunderbolt of overpowering might.
जघन्वानु हरिभिः सम्भ्र्तक्रतविन्द्र वर्त्रं मनुषे गातुयन्नपः|	when indra thou whose power is linked with thy bay steeds hadst smitten vṛtra causing floods to flow for man.
अयछथा बाह्वोर्वज्रमायसमधारयो दिव्या सूर्यं दर्शे|	thou heldst in thine arms the metal thunderbolt and settest in the heaven the sun for all to see.
बर्हत सवश्चन्द्रममवद यदुक्थ्यमक्र्ण्वत भियसा रोहणं दिवः|	in fear they raised the lofty selfresplendent hymn praise giving and effectual leading up to heaven.
यन मानुषप्रधना इन्द्रमूतयः सवर्न्र्षाचो मरुतोअमदन्ननु|	when indras helpers fighting for the good of men the maruts faithful to mankind joyed in the light.
दयौश्चिदस्यामवानहेः सवनादयोयवीद भियसा वज्र इन्द्र ते|	then heaven himself the mighty at that dragons roar reeled back in terror when indra thy thunderbolt.
वर्त्रस्य यद बद्बधानस्य रोदसी मदे सुतस्य शवसाभिनच्छिरः|	in the wild joy of soma had struck off with might the head of vṛtra tyrant of the earth and heaven.
यदिन नविन्द्र पर्थिवी दशभुजिरहानि विश्वा ततनन्तक्र्ष्टयः|	o indra were this earth extended forth tenfold and men who dwell therein multiplied day by day.
अत्राह ते मघवन विश्रुतं सहो दयामनु शवसा बर्हणा भुवत|	still here thy conquering might maghavan would be famed it hath waxed vast as heaven in majesty and power.
तवमस्य पारे रजसो वयोमनः सवभूत्योजा अवसे धर्षन्मनः|	thou bold of heart in thine own native might for help upon the limit of this midair and of heaven.
चक्र्षे भूमिं परतिमानमोजसोअपः सवः परिभूरेष्या दिवम|	hast made the earth to be the pattern of thy strength embracing flood and light thou reachest to the sky.
तवं भुवः परतिमानं पर्थिव्या रष्ववीरस्य बर्हतः पतिर्भूः|	thou art the counterpart of earth the master of lofty heaven with all its mighty heroes.
विश्वमाप्रा अन्तरिक्षं महित्वा सत्यमद्धा नकिरन्यस्त्वावान|	thou hast filled all the region with thy greatness yea of a truth there is none other like thee.
न यस्य दयावाप्र्थिवी अनु वयचो न सिन्धवो रजसो अन्तमानशुः|	whose amplitude the heaven and earth have not attained whose bounds the waters of midair have never reached.
नोत सवव्र्ष्टिं मदे अस्य युध्यत एको अन्यच्चक्र्षे विश्वमानुषक|	not when in joy he fights the stayer of the rain thou and none else hast made all things in order due.
आर्चन्नत्र मरुतः सस्मिन्नाजौ विश्वे देवासो अमदन्ननुत्वा|	the maruts sang thy praise in this encounter and in thee all the deities delighted.
वर्त्रस्य यद भर्ष्टिमता वधेन नि तवमिन्द्र परत्यानं जघन्थ|	what time thou indra with thy spiky weapon thy deadly bolt smotest the face of vṛtra.
यद ध सया त इन्द्र शरुष्टिरस्ति यया बभूथ जरित्र्भ्य ऊती|	if indra thou hast given that gracious hearing where with thou helpest those who sang thy praises.
मा नः कामं महयन्तमा धग विश्वा ते अश्याम्पर्याप आयोः|	blast not the wish that would exalt us may i gain all from thee and pay all mans devotions.
न घा राजेन्द्र आ दभन नो या नु सवसारा कर्णवन्त योनौ|	let not the sovran indra disappoint us in what shall bring both sisters to our dwelling.
आपश्चिदस्मै सुतुका अवेषन गमन न इन्द्रः सख्या वयश्च|	to him have run the quickly flowing waters may indra come to us with life and friendship.
जेता नर्भिरिन्द्रः पर्त्सु शूरः शरोता हवं नाधमानस्य कारोः|	victorious with the men hero in battles indra who hears the singers supplication.
परभर्ता रथं दाशुष उपक उद्यन्त गिरो यदि च तमना भूत|	will bring his car nigh to the man who offers if he himself upholds the songs that praise him.
एवा नर्भिरिन्द्रः सुश्रवस्या परखादः पर्क्षो अभि मित्रिणो भूत|	yea indra with the men through love of glory consumes the sacred food which friends have offered.
समर्य इष सतवते विवाचि सत्राकरो यजमानस्यशंसः|	the everstrengthening song of him who worships is sung in fight amid the clash of voices.
तवया वयं मघवन्निन्द्र शत्रुनभि षयम महतो मन्यमनान|	aided by thee o maghavan o indra may we subdue our foes who count them mighty.
तवं तराता तवमु नो वर्धे भुर्वि|	be our protector strengthen and increase us may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
दिवश्चिदस्य वरिमा वि पप्रथ इन्द्रं न मह्ना पर्थिवीचन परति|	though een this heavens wide space and earth have spread them out nor heaven nor earth may be in greatness indras match.
भीमस्तुविष्माञ्चर्षणिभ्य आतपः शिशीते वज्रं तेजसे न वंसगः|	awful and very mighty causing woe to men he whets his thunderbolt for sharpness as a bull.
सो अर्णवो न नद्यः समुद्रियः परति गर्भ्णाति विश्रिता वरीमभिः|	like as the watery ocean so doth he receive the rivers spread on all sides in their ample width.
इन्द्रः सोमस्य पीतये वर्षायते सनात स युध्म ओजसा पनस्यते|	he bears him like a bull to drink of soma juice and will as warrior from of old be praised for might.
तवं तमिन्द्र पर्वतं न भोजसे महो नर्म्णस्य धर्मणामिरज्यसि|	thou swayest indra all kinds of great manly power so as to bend ast were even that famed mountain down.
पर वीर्येण देवताति चेकिते विश्वस्मा उग्रः कर्मणे पुरोहितः|	foremost among the gods is he through hero might set in the van the strong one for each arduous deed.
स इद वने नमस्युभिर्वचस्यते चारु जनेषु परब्रुवाण इन्द्रियम|	he only in the wood is praised by worshippers when he shows forth to men his own fair indrapower.
वर्षा छन्दुर्भवति हर्यतो वर्षा कषेमेण धेनाम्मघवा यदिन्वति|	a friendly bull is he a bull to be desired when maghavan auspiciously sends forth his voice.
स इन महानि समिथानि मज्मना कर्णोति युध्म ओजसा जनेभ्यः|	yet verily the warrior in his vigorous strength stirreth up with his might great battles for mankind.
अधा चन शरद दधति तविषीमत इन्द्राय वज्रं निघनिघ्नते वधम|	and men have faith in indra the resplendent one what time he hurleth down his bolt his dart of death.
स हि शरवस्युः सदनानि कर्त्रिमा कष्मया वर्धान ओजसाविनाशयन|	though fain for glory and with strength increased on earth he with great might destroys the dwellings made with art.
जयोतींषि कर्ण्वन्नव्र्काणि यज्यवेअव सुक्रतुः सर्तवा अपः सर्जत|	he makes the lights of heaven shine forth secure he bids exceeding wise the floods flow for his worshipper.
दानाय मनः सोमपावन्नस्तु तेअर्वाञ्चा हरी वन्दनश्रुदा कर्धि|	drinker of soma let thy heart incline to give bring thy bays hitherward o thou who hearest praise.
यमिष्ठासः सारथयो य इन्द्र ते न तवा केताा दभ्नुवन्ति भूर्णयः|	those charioteers of thine best skilled to draw the rein the rapid sunbeams indra lead thee not astray.
अप्रक्षितं वसु बिभर्षि हस्तयोरषाळ्हं सहस्तन्वि शरुतो दधे|	thou bearest in both hands treasure that never fails the famed one in his body holds unvanquished might.
आव्र्तासोअवतासो न कर्त्र्भिस्तनूषु ते करतवैन्द्र भूरयः|	o indra in thy members many powers abide like wells surrounded by the ministering priests.
यं तवं रथमिन्द्र मेधसातयेअपाका सन्तमिषिर परणयसि परानवद्य नयसि|	the car which indra thou for service of the gods though it be far away o swift one bringest near which blameless one thou bringest near.
सद्यश्चित तमभिष्टये करो वशश्च वाजिनम|	place swiftly nigh us for our help be it thy will that it be strong.
सास्माकमनवद्य तूतुजान वेधसामिमां वाचं न वेधसाम|	blameless and active hear this speech of orderers this speech of us like orderers.
स शरुधि यः समा पर्तनासु कासु चिद दक्षाय्य इन्द्र भरहूतये नर्भिरसि परतूर्तये नर्भिः|	hear indra thou whom men in every fight must call to show thy strength for cry of battle with the men with men of war for victory.
यः शूरैः सवः सनिता यो विप्रैर्वाजं तरुता|	he who with heroes wins the light who with the singers gains the prize.
तमीशानास इरधन्त वाजिनं पर्क्षमत्यं न वाजिनम|	him the rich seek to gain even as a swift strong steed even as a courser fleet and strong.
दस्मो हि षमा वर्षणं पिन्वसि तवचं कं चिद यावीरररुं शूर मर्त्यं परिव्र्णक्षि मर्त्यम|	thou mighty pourest forth the hide that holds the rain thou keepest far away hero the wicked man thou shuttest out the wicked man.
इन्द्रोत तुभ्यं तद्दिवे तद रुद्राय सवयशसे|	indra to thee i sing to dyaus to rudra glorious in himself.
मित्राय वोचं वरुणाय सप्रथः सुम्र्ळीकाय सप्रथः|	to mitra varuṇa i sing a farfamed hymn to the kind god a farfamed hymn.
अस्माकं व इन्द्रमुश्मसीष्टये सखायं विश्वायुं परासहं युजं वाजेषु परासहं युजम|	we wish our indra here that he may further you the friend beloved of all the very strong ally in wars the very strong ally.
अस्माकंब्रह्मोत्येअवा पर्त्सुषु कासु चित|	in all encounters strengthen thou our prayer to be a help to us.
नहि तवा शत्रु सतरते सत्र्णोषि यंविश्वं शत्रुं सत्र्णोषि यम|	no enemywhom thou smitest downsubdueth thee no enemy whom thou smitest down.
नि षू नमातिमतिं कयस्य चित तेजिष्ठाभिररणिभिर्नोतिभिरुग्राभिरुग्रोतिभिः|	bow down the overweening pride of every foe with succour like to kindlingwood in fiercest flame with mighty succour mighty one.
नेषि णो यथा पुरानेनाः शूर मन्यसे|	guide us thou hero as of old so art thou counted blameless still.
विश्वानि पूरोरप पर्षि वह्निरासा वह्निर्नो अछ|	thou drivest as a priest all sins of man away as priest in person seeking us.
पर तद वोचेयं भव्यायेन्दवे हव्यो न य इषवान मन्म रेजति रक्षोहा मन्म रेजति|	this may i utter to the present somadrop which meet to be invoked with power awakes the prayer awakes the demonslaying prayer.
सवयं सो अस्मदा निदो वधैरजेत दुर्मतिम|	may he himself with darts of death drive far from us the scorners hate.
अव सरवेदघशंसोअवतरमव कषुद्रमिव सरवेत|	far let him flee away who speaketh wickedness and vanish like a mote of dust.
वनेम तद धोत्रया चितन्त्या वनेम रयिं रयिवः सुवीर्यं रण्वं सन्तं सुवीर्यम|	by thoughtful invocation this may we obtain obtain great wealth o wealthy one with hero sons wealth that is sweet with hero sons.
दुर्मन्मानं सुमन्तुभिरेमिषा पर्चीमहि|	him who is wroth we pacify with sacred food and eulogies.
आ सत्याभिरिन्द्रं दयुम्नहूतिभिर्यजत्रं दयुम्नहूतिभिः|	indra the holy with our calls inspired and true the holy one with calls inspired.
परपरा वो अस्मे सवयशोभिरूती परिवर्ग इन्द्रो दुर्मतीनां दरीमन दुर्मतीनाम|	on for your good and ours come indra with the aid of his own lordliness to drive the wicked hence to rend the evilhearted ones.
सवयं सा रिषयध्यै या न उपेषे अत्रैः|	the weapon which devouring fiends cast at us shall destroy themselves.
हतेमसन न वक्षति कषिप्ता जूर्णिर्न वक्षति|	struck down it shall not reach the mark hurled forth the firebrand shall not strike.
तवं न इन्द्र राया परीणसा याहि पथननेहसा पुरो याह्यरक्षसा|	with riches in abundance indra come to us come by an unobstructed path come by a path from demons free.
सचस्व नः पराक आ सचस्वास्तमीक आ|	be with us when we stray afar be with us when our home is nigh.
पाहि नो दूरादारादभिष्टिभिः सदा पाह्यभिष्टिभिः|	protect us with thy help both near and far away protect us ever with thy help.
तवं न इन्द्र राया तरूषसोग्रं चित तवा महिमा सक्षदवसे महे मित्रं नावसे|	thou art our own o indra with victorious wealth let might accompany thee the strong to give us aid like mitra to give mighty aid.
ओजिष्ठ तरातरविता रथं कं चिदमर्त्य|	o strongest saviour helper thou immortal of each warriors car.
अन्यमस्मद रिरिषेः कं चिदद्रिवो रिरिक्षन्तं चिदद्रिवः|	hurt thou another and not us o thunderarmed one who would hurt o thunderarmed.
पाहि न इन्द्र सुष्टुत सरिधोअवयाता सदमिद दुर्मतीनान्देवः सन दुर्मतीनाम|	save us from injury thou who art well extolled ever the warderoff art thou of wicked ones even as a god of wicked ones.
हन्ता पापस्य रक्षसस्त्राता विप्रस्य मावतः|	thou slayer of the evil fiend saviour of singer such as i.
अधा हि तवा जनिता जीजनद वसो रक्षोहणं तवा जीजनद वसो|	good lord the father made thee slayer of the fiends made thee good lord to slay the fiends.
कङकतो न कङकतोअथो सतीनकङकतः|	venomous slightly venomous or venomous aquatic worm.
दवाविति पलुषी इति नयद्र्ष्ट अलिप्सत|	both creatures stinging unobserved with poison have infected me.
अद्र्ष्टान हन्त्यायत्यथो हन्ति परायती|	coming it kills the unobserved it kills them as it goes away.
अथो अवघ्नती हन्त्यथो पिनष्टि पिंषती|	it kills them as it drives them off and bruising bruises them to death.
शरासः कुशरासो दर्भासः सैर्या उत|	sara grass darbha kuśara and sairya muñja vīraṇa.
मौञ्जा अद्र्ष्टा वैरिणाः सर्वे साकं नयलिप्सत|	where all these creatures dwell unseen with poison have infected me.
नि गावो गोष्ठे असदन नि मर्गासो अविक्षत|	the cows had settled in their stalls the beasts of prey had sought their lairs.
नि केतवो जनानां नयद्र्ष्टा अलिप्सत|	extinguished were the lights of men when things unseen infected me.
एत उ तये परत्यद्र्श्रन परदोषं तस्करा इव|	or these these reptiles are observed like lurking thieves at evening time.
अद्र्ष्टा विश्वद्र्ष्टाः परतिबुद्धा अभूतन|	seers of all themselves unseen be therefore very vigilant.
दयौर्वः पिता पर्थिवी माता सोमो भरातादितिः सवसा|	heaven is your sire your mother earth soma your brother aditi.
अद्र्ष्टा विश्वद्र्ष्टास्तिष्ठतेलयता सु कम|	your sister seeing all unseen keep still and dwell ye happily.
ये अंस्या ये अङगयाः सूचीका ये परकङकताः|	biters of shoulder or of limb with needlestings most venomous.
अद्र्ष्टाः किं चनेह वः सर्वे साकं नि जस्यत|	unseen whatever ye may be vanish together and be gone.
उत पुरस्तात सूर्य एति विश्वद्र्ष्टो अद्र्ष्टहा|	slayer of things unseen the sun beheld of all mounts eastward up.
अद्र्ष्टान सर्वाञ जम्भयन सर्वाश्च यातुधान्यः|	consuming all that are not seen and evil spirits of the night.
उदपप्तदसौ सूर्यः पुरु विश्वानि जूर्वन|	there hath the sungod mounted up who scorches much and everything.
आदित्यः पर्वतेभ्यो विश्वद्र्ष्टो अद्र्ष्टहा|	even the Āditya from the hills allseen destroying things unseen.
सूर्ये विषमा सजामि दर्तिं सुरावतो गर्हे|	i hang the poison in the sun a wineskin in a vintners house.
सो चिन नु नमराति नो वयं मरामारे अस्य योजनं हरिष्ठा मधु तवामधुला चकार|	he will not die nor shall we die his path is far he whom bay horses bear hath turned thee to sweet meath.
इयत्तिका शकुन्तिका सका जघास ते विषम|	this little bird so very small hath swallowed all thy poison up.
सो चिन नु|	she will not die nor shall we die his path is far he whom bay horses bear hath turned thee to sweet meath.
तरिः सप्त विष्पुलिङगका विषस्य पुष्यमक्षन|	the threetimesseven bright sparks of fire have swallowed up the poisons strength.
ताश्चिन्नु न मरन्ति नो वयं म|	they will not die nor shall we die his path is far he whom bay horses bear hath turned thee to sweet meath.
नवानां नवतीनां विषस्य रोपुषीणाम|	of ninety rivers and of nine with power to stay the venoms course.
सर्वासामग्रभं नामारे अस्य यो|	the names of all i have secured his path is far he whom bay horses bear hath turned thee to sweet meath.
तरिः सप्त मयूर्यः सप्त सवसारो अग्रुवः|	so have the peahens threetimesseven so have the maiden sisters seven.
तास्ते विषं वि जभ्रिर उदकं कुम्भिनीरिव|	carried thy venom far away as girls bear water in their jars.
इयत्तकः कुषुम्भकस्तकं भिनद्म्यश्मना|	the poisoninsect is so small i crush the creature with a stone.
ततो विषं पर वाव्र्ते पराचीरनु संवतः|	i turn the poison hence away departed unto distant lands.
कुषुम्भकस्तदब्रवीद गिरेः परवर्तमानकः|	forth issuing from the mountains side the poisoninsect spake and said.
वर्श्चिकस्यारसं विषमरसं वर्श्चिक ते विषम|	scorpion they venom is but weak.
इन्द्रो मदाय वाव्र्धे शवसे वर्त्रहा नर्भिः|	the men have lifted indra up the vṛtra slayer to joy and strength.
तमिन महत्स्वाजिषूतेमर्भे हवामहे स वाजेषु पर नोअविषत|	him verily we invocate in battles whether great or small be he our aid in deeds of might.
असि हि वीर सेन्योअसि भूरि पराददिः|	thou hero art a warrior thou art giver of abundant spoil.
असि दभ्रस्य चिद्व्र्धो यजमानाय शिक्षसि सुन्वते भूरि ते वसु|	strengthening een the feeble thou aidest the sacrificer thou givest the offerer ample wealth.
यदुदीरत आजयो धर्ष्णवे धीयते धना|	when war and battles are on foot booty is laid before the bold.
युक्ष्वा मदच्युता हरी कं हनः कं वसौ दधोअस्मानिन्द्र वसौ दधः|	yoke thou thy wildlyrushing bays whom wilt thou slay and whom enrich do thou o indra make us rich.
करत्वामहाननुष्वधं भीम आ वाव्र्धे शवः|	mighty through wisdom as he lists terrible he hath waxed in strength.
शरियर्ष्व उपाकयोर्नि शिप्री हरिवान दधे हस्तयोर्वज्रमायसम|	lord of bay steeds strongjawed sublime he in joined hands for glorys sake hath grasped his iron thunderbolt.
आ पप्रौ पार्थिवं रजो बद्बधे रोचना दिवि|	he filled the earthly atmosphere and pressed against the lights in heaven.
न तवावानिन्द्र कश्चन न जातो न जनिष्यतेअति विश्वं ववक्षिथ|	none like thee ever hath been born none indra will be born like thee thou hast waxed mighty over all.
यो अर्यो मर्तभोजनं पराददाति दाशुषे|	may he who to the offerer gives the foemans mansustaining food.
इन्द्रो अस्मभ्यंशिक्षतु वि भजा भूरि ते वसु भक्षीय तव राधसः|	may indra lend his aid to us deal forthabundant is thy wealththat in thy bounty i may share.
मदेमदे हि नो ददिर्यूथा गवां रजुक्रतुः|	he righteoushearted at each time of rapture gives us herds of kine.
सं गर्भायपुरू शतोभयाहस्त्या वसु शिशीहि राय आ भर|	gather in both thy hands for us treasures of many hundred sorts sharpen thou us and bring us wealth.
मादयस्व सुते सचा शवसे शूर राधसे|	refresh thee hero with the juice outpoured for bounty and for strength.
विद्मा हि तवापुरूवसुमुप कामान सस्र्ज्महेअथा नोअविता भव|	we know thee lord of ample store to thee have sent our hearts desires be therefore our protector thou.
एते त इन्द्र जन्तवो विश्वं पुष्यन्ति वार्यम|	these people indra keep for thee all that is worthy of thy choice.
अन्तर्हि खयोजनानामर्यो वेदो अदाशुषां तेषां नो वेद आ भर|	discover thou as lord the wealth of men who offer up no gifts bring thou to us this wealth of theirs.
यत्र गरावा पर्थुबुध्न ऊर्ध्वो भवति सोतवे|	there where the broadbased stone raised on high to press the juices out.
उलूखलसुतानामवेद विन्द्र जल्गुलः|	o indra drink with eager thirst the droppings which the mortar sheds.
यत्र दवाविव जघनाधिषवण्या कर्ता|	where like broad hips to hold the juice the platters of the press are laid.
उलू|	o indra drink with eager thirst the droppings which the mortar sheds.
यत्र नार्यपच्यवमुपच्यवं च शिक्षते|	there where the woman marks and leans the pestles constant rise and fall.
उलू|	o indra drink with eager thirst the droppings which the mortar sheds.
यत्र मन्थां विबध्नते रश्मीन यमितवा इव|	where as with reins to guide a horse they bind the churningstaff with cords.
उलू|	o indra drink with eager thirst the droppings which the mortar sheds.
यच्चिद धि तवं गर्हेग्र्ह उलूखलक युज्यसे|	if of a truth in every house o mortar thou art set for work.
इह दयुमत्तमं वद यजतामिव दुन्दुभिः|	here give thou forth thy clearest sound loud as the drum of conquerors.
उत सम ते वनस्पते वातो वि वात्यग्रमित|	o sovran of the forest as the wind blows soft in front of thee.
अथो इन्द्राय पातवे सुनु सोममुलूखल|	mortar for indra press thou forth the soma juice that he may drink.
आयजी वाजसातमा ता हयुच्चा विजर्भ्र्तः|	best strengthgivers ye stretch wide jaws o sacrificial implements.
हरी इवान्धांसि बप्सता|	like two bay horses champing herbs.
ता नो अद्य वनस्पती रष्वाव रष्वेभिः सोत्र्भिः|	ye sovrans of the forest both swift with swift pressers press today.
इन्द्राय मधुमत सुतम|	sweet soma juice for indras drink.
उच्छिष्टं चम्वोर्भर सोमं पवित्र आ सर्ज|	take up in beakers what remains the soma on the filter pour.
नि धेहि गोरधि तवचि|	and on the oxhide set the dregs.
एष पर पूर्वीरव तस्य चम्रिषोअत्यो न योषामुदयंस्त भुर्वणिः|	for this mans full libations held in ladles he hath roused him eager as a horse to meet the mare.
दक्षं महे पाययते हिरण्ययं रथमाव्र्त्या हरियोगं रभ्वसम|	he stays his golden car yoked with bay horses swift and drinks the soma juice which strengthens for great deeds.
तं गूर्तयो नेमन्निषः परीणसः समुद्रं न संचरणे सनिष्यवः|	to him the guidancefollowing songs of praise flow full as those who seek gain go in company to the flood.
पतिं दक्षस्य विदथस्य नू सहो गिरिं न वेना अधि रोह तेजसा|	to him the lord of power the holy synods might as to a hill with speed ascend the loving ones.
स तुर्वणिर्महानरेणु पौंस्ये गिरेर्भ्र्ष्टिर्न भराजते तुजा शवः|	victorious great is he in manly battle shines unstained with dust his might as shines a mountain peak.
येन शुष्णं मायिनमायसो मदे दुध्राभूषु रामयन नि दामनि|	wherewith the iron one fierce een against the strong in rapture fettered wily Śushṇa fast in bonds.
देवी यदि तविषी तवाव्र्धोतय इन्द्रं सिषक्त्युषसं न सूर्यः|	when strength the goddess made more strong for help by thee waits upon indra as the sun attends the dawn.
यो धर्ष्णुना शवसा बाधते तम इयर्ति रेणुं बर्हदर्हरिष्वणिः|	then he who with his might unflinching kills the gloom stirs up the dust aloft with joy and triumphing.
वि यत तिरो धरुणमच्युतं रजोअतिष्ठिपो दिव आतासुबर्हणा|	when thou with might upon the framework of the heaven didst fix across airs region firmly unremoved.
सवर्मीळ्हे यन मद इन्द्र हर्ष्याहन वर्त्रं निरपामौब्जो अर्णवम|	in the lightwinning war indra in rapturous joy thou smotest vṛtra dead and broughtest floods of rain.
तवं दिवो धरुणं धिष ओजसा पर्थिव्या इन्द्र सदनेषु माहिनः|	thou with thy might didst grasp the holderup of heaven thou who art mighty also in the seats of earth.
तवं सुतस्य मदे अरिणा अपो वि वर्त्रस्य समया पाष्यारुजः|	thou gladdened by the juice hast set the waters free and broken vṛtras stony fences through and through.
वेदिषदे परियधामाय सुद्युते धासिम इव पर भरा योनिम अग्नये|	to splendid agni seated by the altar loving well his home i bring the food as twere his place of birth.
वस्त्रेणेव वासया मन्मना शुचिं जयोतीरथं शुक्रवर्णं तमोहनम|	i clothe the bright one with my hymn as with a robe him with the car of light brighthued dispelling gloom.
अभि दविजन्मा तरिव्र्दन्नं रज्यते संवत्सरे वाव्र्धे जग्धमी पुनः|	child of a double birth he grasps at triple food in the years course what he hath swallowed grows anew.
अन्यस्यासा जिह्वय जेन्यो वर्षा नयन्येन वनिनोम्र्ष्ट वरणः|	he by anothers mouth and tongue a noble bull with other as an elephant consumes the trees.
कर्ष्णप्रुतौ वेविजे अस्य सक्षिता उभा तरेते अभि मतरा शिशुम|	the pair who dwell together moving in the dark bestir themselves both parents hasten to the babe.
पराचजिह्वं धवसयन्तं तर्षुच्युतमा साच्यं कुपयं वर्धनं पितुः|	impetuoustongued destroying springing swiftly forth one to be watched and cherished strengthener of his sire.
मुमुक्ष्वो मनवे मनवस्यते रघुद्रुवः कर्ष्णसीतास ऊ जुवः|	for man thou friend of men these steeds of thine are yoked impatient lightly running ploughing blackened lines.
असमना अजिरासो रघुष्यदो वातजूता उप युज्यन्त आशवः|	discordantminded fleet gliding with easy speed urged onward by the wind and rapid in their course.
आदस्य ते धवसयन्तो वर्थेरते कर्ष्णमभ्वं महि वर्पःकरिक्रतः|	dispelling on their way the horror of black gloom making a glorious show these flames of his fly forth.
यत सीं महीमवनिं पराभि मर्म्र्शदभिश्वसन सतनयन्नेति नानदत|	when oer the spacious tract he spreads himself abroad and rushes panting on with thunder and with roar.
भूषन न योअधि बभ्रूषु नम्नते वर्षेव पत्नीरभ्येति रोरुवत|	amid brown plants he stoops as if adorning them and rushes bellowing like a bull upon his wives.
ओजायमानस्तन्वश्च शुम्भते भीमो न शर्न्गादविधव दुर्ग्र्भिः|	proving his might he decks the glory of his form and shakes his horns like one terrific hard to stay.
स संस्तिरो विष्टिरः सं गर्भयति जनन्नेव जानतीर्नित्य आ शये|	now covered now displayed he grasps as one who knows his restingplace in those who know him well.
पुनर्वर्धन्ते अपि यन्ति देव्यमन्यद वर्पः पित्रोः कर्ण्वते सचा|	a second time they wax and gather godlike power and blending both together change their parents form.
तमग्रुवः केशिनीः सं हि रेभिर ऊर्ध्वास्तस्थुर्मम्रुषीः परायवे पुनः|	the maidens with long tresses hold him in embrace dead they rise up again to meet the living one.
तासां जरां परमुञ्चन्नेति नानददसुं परं जनयञ जीवमस्त्र्तम|	releasing them from age with a loud roar he comes filling them with new spirit living unsubdued.
अधीवसं परि मतु रिहन्नह तुविग्रेभिः सत्वभिर्याति वि जरयः|	licking the mantle of the mother far and wide he wanders over fields with beasts that flee apace.
वयो दधत पद्वते रेरिहत सदानु शयेनी सचतेवर्तनीरह|	strengthening all that walk licking up all around a blackened path forsooth he leaves whereer he goes.
अस्माकमग्ने मघवत्सु दीदिह्यध शवसीवान वर्षभो दमूनाः|	o agni shine resplendent with our wealthy chiefs like a loudsnorting bull accustomed to the house.
अवास्या शिशुमतीरदीदेर्वर्मेव युत्सु परिजर्भुराणः|	thou casting off thine infant wrappings blazest forth as though thou hadst put on a coat of mail for war.
इदमग्ने सुधितं दुर्धितादधि परियादु चिन मन्मनः परेयो अस्तु ते|	may this our perfect prayer be dearer unto thee than an imperfect prayer although it please thee well.
यत ते शुक्रं तन्वो रोचते शुचि तेनास्मभ्यंवनसे रत्नमा तवम|	with the pure brilliancy that radiates from thy form mayest thou grant to us abundant store of wealth.
रथाय नावमुत नो गर्हाय नित्यारित्रां पद्वतीं रास्यग्ने|	grant to our chariot to our house o agni a boat with moving feet and constant oarage.
अस्माकं वीरानुत नो मघोनो जनांश्च या पारयाच्छर्म या च|	one that may further well our wealthy princes and all the folk and be our certain refuge.
अभी नो अग्न उक्थमिज्जुगुर्या दयावाक्षामा सिन्धवश्च सवगूर्ताः|	welcome our laud with thine approval agni may earth and heaven and freely flowing rivers.
गव्यं यव्यं यन्तो दीर्घाहेषं वरमरुण्यो वरन्त|	yield us long life and food and corn and cattle and may the red dawns choose for us their choicest.
सह वामेन न उषो वयुछा दुहितर्दिवः|	dawn on us with prosperity o uṣas daughter of the sky.
सह दयुम्नेन बर्हता विभावरि राया देवि दास्वती|	dawn with great glory goddess lady of the light dawn thou with riches bounteous one.
अश्वावतीर्गोमतीर्विश्वसुविदो भूरि चयवन्त वस्तवे|	they bringing steeds and kine boongivers of all wealth have oft sped forth to lighten us.
उदीरय परति मा सून्र्ता उषश्चोद राधो मघोनाम|	o uṣas waken up for me the sounds of joy send us the riches of the great.
उवासोषा उछाच्च नु देवी जीरा रथानाम|	uṣas hath dawned and now shall dawn the goddess driver forth of cars.
ये अस्या आचरणेषु दध्रिरे समुद्रे न शरवस्यवः|	which as she cometh nigh have fixed their thought on her like gloryseekers on the flood.
उषो ये ते पर यामेषु युञ्जते मनो दानाय सूरयः|	here kaṇva chief of kaṇvas race sings forth aloud the glories of the heroes names.
अत्राह तत कण्व एषां कण्वतमो नाम गर्णाति नर्णाम|	the princes who o uṣas as thou comest near direct their thoughts to liberal gifts.
आ घा योषेव सूनर्युषा याति परभुञ्जती|	like a good matron uṣas comes carefully tending everything.
जरयन्ती वर्जनं पद्वदीयत उत पातयति पक्षिणः|	rousing all life she stirs all creatures that have feet and makes the birds of air fly up.
वि या सर्जति समनं वयर्थिनः पदां न वेत्योदती|	she sends the busy forth each man to his pursuit delay she knows not as she springs.
वयो नकिष टे पप्तिवांस आसते वयुष्टौ वाजिनीवति|	o rich in opulence after thy dawning birds that have flown forth no longer rest.
एषायुक्त परावतः सूर्यस्योदयनादधि|	this dawn hath yoked her steeds afar beyond the rising of the sun.
शतं रथेभिः सुभगोषा इयं वि यात्यभि मानुषान|	borne on a hundred chariots she auspicious dawn advances on her way to men.
विश्वमस्या नानाम चक्षसे जगज्ज्योतिष कर्णोति सूनरी|	to meet her glance all living creatures bend them down excellent one she makes the light.
अप दवेषो मघोनी दुहिता दिव उषा उछदप सरिधः|	uṣas the daughter of the sky the opulent shines foes and enmities away.
उष आ भाहि भानुना चन्द्रेण दुहितर्दिवः|	shine on us with thy radiant light o uṣas daughter of the sky.
आवहन्ती भूर्यस्मभ्यं सौभगं वयुछन्ती दिविष्टिषु|	bringing to us great store of high felicity and beaming on our solemn rites.
विश्वस्य हि पराणनं जीवनं तवे वि यदुछसि सूनरि|	for in thee is each living creatures breath and life when excellent thou dawnest forth.
सा नो रथेन बर्हता विभावरि शरुधि चित्रामघे हवम|	borne on thy lofty car o lady of the light hear thou of wondrous wealth our call.
उषो वाजं हि वंस्व यश्चित्रो मानुषे जने|	o uṣas win thyself the strength which among men is wonderful.
तेना वह सुक्र्तो अध्वरानुप ये तवा गर्णन्ति वह्नयः|	bring thou thereby the pious unto holy rites those who as priests sing praise to thee.
विश्वान देवाना वह सोमपीतयेअन्तरिक्षादुषस्त्वम|	bring from the firmament o uṣas all the gods that they may drink our soma juice.
सास्मासु धा गोमदश्वावदुक्थ्यमुषो वाजं सुवीर्यम|	and being what thou art vouchsafe us kine and steeds strength meet for praise and hero might.
यस्या रुशन्तो अर्चयः परति भद्रा अद्र्क्षत|	may uṣas whose auspicious rays are seen resplendent round about.
सा नो रयिं विश्ववारं सुपेशसमुषा ददातु सुग्म्यम|	grant us great riches fair in form of all good things wealth which light labour may attain.
ये चिद धि तवां रषयः पूर्व ऊतये जुहूरेअवसे महि|	mighty one whom the Ṛṣis of old time invoked for their protection and their help.
सा न सतोमानभि गर्णीहि राधसोषः शुक्रेण शोचिषा|	o uṣas graciously answer our songs of praise with bounty and with brilliant light.
उषो यदद्य भानुना वि दवाराव रणवो दिवः|	uṣas as thou with light to day hast opened the twin doors of heaven.
पर नो यछतादव्र्कं पर्थु छर्दिः पर देवि गोमतीरिषः|	so grant thou us a dwelling wide and free from foes o goddess give us food with kine.
सं नो राया बर्हता विश्वपेशसा मिमिक्ष्वा समिळाभिरा|	bring us to wealth abundant sent in every shape to plentiful refreshing food.
सं दयुम्नेन विश्वतुरोषो महि सं वाजैर्वाजिनीवति|	to allsubduing splendour uṣas mighty one to strength thou rich in spoil and wealth.
मा नो मित्रो वरुणो अर्यमायुरिन्द्र रभुक्षा मरुतः परिख्यन|	slight us not varuṇa aryaman or mitra Ṛbhukṣan indra Āyu or the maruts.
यद वाजिनो देवजतस्य सप्तेः परवक्ष्यामो विदथे वीर्याणि|	when we declare amid the congregation the virtues of the strong steed goddescended.
यन निर्णिजा रेक्णसा पराव्र्तस्य रतिं गर्भीतां मुखतो नयन्ति|	what time they bear before the courser covered with trappings and with wealth the grasped oblation.
सुप्रनजो मेम्यद विश्वरूप इन्द्रापूष्णोः परियमप्येति पाथः|	the dappled goat goeth straightforward bleating to the place dear to indra and to pūṣan.
एष छागः पुरो अश्वेन वाजिना पूष्णो भागो नीयते विश्वदेव्यः|	dear to all gods this goat the share of pūṣan is first led forward with the vigorous courser.
अभिप्रियं यत पुरोळाशमर्वता तवष्टेदेनं सौश्रवसाय जिन्वति|	while tvaṣṭar sends him forward with the charger acceptable for sacrifice to glory.
यद धविष्यं रतुशो देवयानं तरिर्मानुषाः पर्यश्वं नयन्ति|	when thrice the men lead round the steed in order who goeth to the gods as meet oblation.
अत्रा पूष्णः परथमो भाग एति यज्ञं देवेभ्यः परतिवेदयन्नजः|	the goat precedeth him the share of pūṣan and to the gods the sacrifice announceth.
होताध्वर्युरावया अग्निमिन्धो गरावग्राभ उत शंस्ता सुविप्रः|	invoker ministering priest atoner firekindler somapresser sage reciter.
तेन यज्ञेन सवरंक्र्तेन सविष्टेन वक्षणा आप्र्णध्वम|	with this well ordered sacrifice well finished do ye fill full the channels of the rivers.
यूपव्रस्का उत ये यूपवाहाश्चषालं ये अश्वयूपाय तक्षति|	the hewers of the post and those who carry it and those who carve the knob to deck the horses stake.
ये चार्वते पचनं सम्भरन्त्युतो तेषामभिगूर्तिर्न इन्वतु|	those who prepare the cookingvessels for the steedmay the approving help of these promote our work.
उप परागात सुमन मेअधायि मन्म देवानामाशा उप वीतप्र्ष्ठः|	forth for the regions of the gods the charger with his smooth back is come my prayer attends him.
अन्वेनं विप्रा रषयो मदन्ति देवानां पुष्टे चक्र्मा सुबन्धुम|	in him rejoice the singers and the sages a good friend have we won for the gods banquet.
यद वाजिनो दाम सुन्दानमर्वतो या शीर्षण्या रशनारज्जुरस्य|	may the fleet coursers halter and his heelropes the headstall and the girths and cords about him.
यद वा घास्य परभ्र्तमास्ये तर्णं सर्वा ता ते अपि देवेष्वस्तु|	and the grass put within his mouth to bait himamong the gods too let all these be with thee.
यदश्वस्य करविषो मक्षिकाश यद वा सवरौ सवधितौ रिप्तमस्ति|	what part of the steeds flesh the fly hath eaten or is left sticking to the post or hatchet.
यद धस्तयोः शमितुर्यन नखेषु सर्वा ता ते अपि देवेष्वस्तु|	or to the slayers hands and nails adherethamong the gods too may all this be with thee.
यदूवध्यमुदरस्यापवाति य आमस्य करविषो गन्धो अस्ति|	food undigested steaming from his belly and any odour of raw flesh remaining.
सुक्र्ता तच्छमितारः कर्ण्वन्तूत मेधं शर्तपाकं पचन्तु|	this let the immolators set in order and dress the sacrifice with perfect cooking.
यत ते गात्रादग्निना पच्यमानादभि शूलं निहतस्यावधावति|	what from thy body which with fire is roasted when thou art set upon the spit distilleth.
मा तद भूम्यामा शरिषन मा तर्णेषु देवेभ्यस्तदुशद्भ्यो रातमस्तु|	let not that lie on earth or grass neglected but to the longing gods let all be offered.
ये वाजिनं परिपश्यन्ति पक्वं य ईमाहुः सुरभिर्निर्हरेति|	they who observing that the horse is ready call out and say the smell is good remove it.
ये चार्वतो मांसभिक्षामुपासत उतो तेषामभिगूर्तिर्न इन्वतु|	and craving meat await the distributionmay their approving help promote labour.
यन नीक्षणं मांस्पचन्या उखाया या पात्राणि यूष्णासेचनानि|	the trialfork of the fleshcooking caldron the vessels out of which the broth is sprinkled.
ऊष्मण्यापिधाना चरूणामङकाः सूनाःपरि भूषन्त्यश्वम|	the warmingpots the covers of the dishes hooks carvingboardsall these attend the charger.
निक्रमणं निषदनं विवर्तनं यच्च पड्बीशमर्वतः|	the startingplace his place of rest and rolling the ropes wherewith the chargers feet were fastened.
यच्च पपौ यच्च घासिं जघास सर्वा ता ते अपि देवेष्वस्तु|	the water that he drank the food he tastedamong the gods too may all these attend thee.
मा तवाग्निर्ध्वनयीद धूमगन्धिर्मोखा भराजन्त्यभि विक्त जघ्रिः|	let not the fire smokescented make thee crackle nor glowing caldron smell and break to pieces.
इष्टं वीतमभिगूर्तं वषट्क्र्तं तं देवासः परति गर्भ्णन्त्यश्वम|	offered beloved approved and consecratedsuch charger do the gods accept with favour.
यदश्वाय वास उपस्त्र्णन्त्यधीवासं या हिरण्यान्यस्मै|	the robe they spread upon the horse to clothe him the upper covering and the golden trappings.
सन्दानमर्वन्तं पड्बीशं परिया देवेष्वा यामयन्ति|	the halters which restrain the steed the heelropesall these as grateful to the gods they offer.
यत ते सादे महसा शूक्र्तस्य पार्ष्ण्या वा कशया वा तुतोद|	if one when seated with excessive urging hath with his heel or with his whip distressed thee.
सरुचेव ता हविषो अध्वरेषु सर्वा ता ते बरह्मणासूदयामि|	all these thy woes as with the oblations ladle at sacrifices with my prayer i banish.
चतुस्त्रिंशद वाजिनो देवबन्धोर्वङकरीरश्वस्य सवधितिःसमेति|	the fourandthirty ribs of the swift charger kin to the gods the slayers hatchet pierces.
अछिद्रा गात्रा वयुना कर्णोत परुषपरुरनुघुष्य वि शस्त|	cut ye with skill so that the parts be flawless and piece by piece declaring them dissect them.
एकस्त्वष्तुरश्वस्या विशस्ता दवा यन्तारा भवतस्तथर्तुः|	of tvaṣṭars charger there is one dissectorthis is the customtwo there are who guide him.
या ते गात्राणां रतुथा कर्णोमि ताता पिण्डनां पर जुहोम्यग्नौ|	such of his limbs as i divide in order these amid the balls in fire i offer.
मा तवा तपत परिय आत्मापियन्तं मा सवधितिस्तन्व आ तिष्ठिपत ते|	let not thy dear soul burn thee as thou comest let not the hatchet linger in thy body.
मा ते गर्ध्नुरविशस्तातिहाय छिद्रा गात्रण्यसिना मिथू कः|	let not a greedy clumsy immolator missing the joints mangle thy limbs unduly.
न वा उ एतन मरियसे न रिष्यसि देवानिदेषि पथिभिः सुगेभिः|	no here thou diest not thou art not injured by easy paths unto the gods thou goest.
हरी ते युञ्जा पर्षती अभूतामुपास्थाद वाजी धुरि रासभस्य|	both bays both spotted mares are now thy fellows and to the asss pole is yoked the charger.
सुगव्यं नो वाजी सवश्व्यं पुंसः पुत्रानुत विश्वापुषं रयिम|	may this steed bring us allsustaining riches wealth in good kine good horses manly offspring.
अनागास्त्वं नो अदितिः कर्णोतु कषत्रं नो अश्वो वनतां हविष्मान|	freedom from sin may aditi vouchsafe us the steed with our oblations gain us lordship.
इन्द्रेहि मत्स्यन्धसो विश्वेभिः सोमपर्वभिः|	come indra and delight thee with the juice at all the soma feasts.
महानभिष्टिरोजसा|	protector mighty in thy strength.
एमेनं सर्जता सुते मन्दिमिन्द्राय मन्दिने|	to indra pour ye forth the juice the active gladdening juice to him.
चक्रिं विश्वानि चक्रये|	the gladdening omnific god.
मत्स्वा सुशिप्र मन्दिभिः सतोमेभिर्विश्वचर्षणे|	o lord of all men fair of cheek rejoice thee in the gladdening lauds.
सचैषुसवनेष्वा|	present at these drinkofferings.
अस्र्ग्रमिन्द्र ते गिरः परति तवामुदहासत|	songs have outpoured themselves to thee indra the strong the guardian lord.
अजोषा वर्षभं पतिम|	and raised themselves unsatisfied.
सं चोदय चित्रमर्वाग राध इन्द्र वरेण्यम|	send to us bounty manifold o indra worthy of our wish.
असदित ते विभु परभु|	for power supreme is only thine.
अस्मान सु तत्र चोदयेन्द्र राये रभस्वतः|	o indra stimulate thereto us emulously fain for wealth.
तुविद्युम्न यशस्वतः|	and glorious o most splendid one.
सं गोमदिन्द्र वाजवदस्मे पर्थु शरवो बर्हत|	give indra wide and lofty fame wealthy in cattle and in strength.
विश्वायुर्धेह्यक्षितम|	lasting our lifetime failing not.
अस्मे धेहि शरवो बर्हद दयुम्नं सहस्रसातमम|	grant us high fame o indra grant riches bestowing thousands those.
इन्द्र ता रथिनीरिषः|	fair fruits of earth borne home in wains.
वसोरिन्द्रं वसुपतिं गीर्भिर्ग्र्णन्त रग्मियम|	praising with songs the praiseworthy who cometh to our aid we call.
होम गन्तारमूतये|	indra the treasurelord of wealth.
सुतेसुते नयोकसे बर्हद बर्हत एदरिः|	to lofty indra dweller by each libation the pious man.
इन्द्राय शूषमर्चति|	sings forth aloud a strengthening hymn.
आ चर्षणिप्रा वर्षभो जनानां राजा कर्ष्टीनां पुरुहूत इन्द्रः|	the bull of men who cherishes all people king of the races indra called of many.
सतुतः शरवस्यन्नवसोप मद्रिग युक्त्वा हरीव्र्षणा याह्यर्वां|	fameloving praised hither to me with succour turn having yoked both vigorous bay horses.
ये ते वर्षणो वर्षभास इन्द्र बरह्मयुजो वर्षरथासो अत्याः|	thy mighty stallions yoked by prayer o indra thy coursers to thy mighty chariot harnessed.
ताना तिष्ठ तेभिरा याह्यर्वां हवामहे तवा सुत इन्द्र सोमे|	ascend thou these and borne by them come hither with soma juice outpoured indra we call thee.
आ तिष्ठ रथं वर्षणं वर्षा ते सुतः सोमः परिषिक्ता मधूनि|	ascend thy mighty car the mighty soma is poured for thee and sweets are sprinkled round us.
युक्त्वा वर्षभ्यां वर्षभ कषितीनां हरिभ्यां याहि परवतोप मद्रिक|	come down to usward bull of human races come having harnessed them with strong bay horses.
अयं यज्ञो देवया अयं मियेध इमा बरह्मण्ययमिन्द्र सोमः|	here is godreaching sacrifice here the victim here indra are the prayers here is the soma.
सतीर्णं बर्हिरा तु शक्र पर याहि पिबा निषद्यवि मुचा हरी इह|	strewn is the sacred grass come hither Śakra seat thee and drink unyoke thy two bay coursers.
ओ सुष्टुत इन्द्र याह्यर्वां उप बरह्माणि मान्यस्य कारोः|	come to us indra come thou highly lauded to the devotions of the singer māna.
विद्याम वस्तोरवसा गर्णन्तो वि|	singing may we find early through thy succour may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
आ वां रथं पुरुमायं मनोजुवं जीराश्वं यज्ञियं जीवसे हुवे|	hither that i may live i call unto the feast your wondrous car thoughtswift borne on by rapid steeds.
सहस्रकेतुं वनिनं शतद्वसुं शरुष्टीवानं वरिवोधामभि परयः|	with thousand banners hundred treasures pouring gifts promptly obedient bestowing ample room.
ऊर्ध्वा धीतिः परत्यस्य परयामन्यधायि शस्मन समयन्त आ दिशः|	even as it moveth near my hymn is lifted up and all the regions come together to sing praise.
सवदामि घर्मं परति यन्त्यूतय आ वामूर्जानी रथमश्विनारुहत|	i sweeten the oblations now the helpers come Ūrjānī hath o aśvins mounted on your car.
सं यन मिथः पस्प्र्धानासो अग्मत शुभे मखा अमिता जायवो रणे|	when striving man with man for glory they have met brisk measureless eager for victory in fight.
युवोरह परवणे चेकिते रथो यदश्विना वहथः सूरिमा वरम|	then verily your car is seen upon the slope when ye o aśvins bring some choice boon to the prince.
युवं भुज्युं भुरमाणं विभिर्गतं सवयुक्तिभिर्निवहन्ता पित्र्भ्य आ|	ye came to bhujyu while he struggled in the flood with flying birds selfyoked ye bore him to his sires.
यासिष्टं वर्तिर्व्र्षणा विजेन्यं दिवोदासाय महि चेति वामवः|	ye went to the fardistant home o mighty ones and famed is your great aid to divodāsa given.
युवोरश्विना वपुषे युवायुजं रथं वाणी येमतुरस्य शर्ध्यम|	aśvins the car which you had yoked for glorious show your own two voices urged directed to its goal.
आ वां पतित्वं सख्याय जग्मुषी योषाव्र्णीतजेन्या युवां पती|	then she who came for friendship maid of noble birth elected you as husbands you to be her lords.
युवं रेभं परिषूतेरुरुष्यथो हिमेन घर्मं परितप्तमत्रये|	rebha ye saved from tyranny for atris sake ye quenched with cold the fiery pit that compassed him.
युवं शयोरवसं पिप्यथुर्गवि पर दीर्घेण वन्दनस्तार्यायुषा|	ye made the cow of Śayu stream refreshing milk and vandana was holpen to extended life.
युवं वन्दनं निर्र्तं जरण्यया रथं न दस्रा करणा समिन्वथः|	doers of marvels skilful workers ye restored vandana like a car worn out with length of days.
कषेत्रादा विप्रं जनथो विपन्यया पर वामत्र विधते दंसना भुवत|	from earth ye brought the sage to life in wondrous mode be your great deeds done here for him who honours you.
अगछतं कर्पमाणं परावति पितुः सवस्य तयजसा निबाधितम|	ye went to him who mourned in a far distant place him who was left forlorn by treachery of his sire.
सवर्वतीरित ऊतीर्युवोरह चित्रा अभीके अभवन्नभिष्टयः|	rich with the light of heaven was then the help ye gave and marvellous your succour when ye stood by him.
उत सया वां मधुमन मक्षिकारपन मदे सोमस्यौशिजो हुवन्यति|	to you in praise of sweetness sang the honeybee auśija calleth you in somas rapturous joy.
युवं दधीचो मन आ विवासथोअथा शिरः परति वामश्व्यं वदत|	ye drew unto yourselves the spirit of dadhyac and then the horses head uttered his words to you.
युवं पेदवे पुरुवारमश्विना सप्र्धां शवेतं तरुतारन्दुवस्यथः|	a horse did ye provide for pedu excellent white o ye aśvins conqueror of combatants.
शर्यैरभिद्युं पर्तनासु दुष्टरं चर्क्र्त्यमिन्द्रमिव चर्षणीसहम|	invincible in war by arrows seeking heaven worthy of fame like indra vanquisher of men.
समिद्धो अद्य राजसि देवो देवैः सहस्रजित|	winner of thousands kindled thou shinest a god with gods today.
दूतो हव्या कविर्वह|	bear out oblations envoy sage.
तनुनपाद रतं यते मध्वा यज्ञः समज्यते|	child of thyself the sacrifice is for the righteous blent with meath.
दधत सहस्रिणीरिषः|	presenting viands thousandfold.
आजुह्वानो न ईड्यो देवाना वक्षि यज्ञियान|	invoked and worthy of our praise bring gods whose due is sacrifice.
अग्ने सहस्रसा असि|	thou agni givest countless gifts.
पराचीनं बर्हिरोजसा सहस्रवीरमस्त्र्णन|	to seat a thousand heroes they eastward have strewn the grass with might.
यत्रादित्या विराजथ|	whereon Ādityas ye shine forth.
विराट सम्राड विभ्वीः परभ्वीर्बह्वीश्च भूयसीश्चयाः|	the sovran allimperial doors wide good many and manifold.
दुरो घर्तान्यक्षरन|	have poured their streams of holy oil.
सुरुक्मे हि सुपेशसाधि शरिया विराजतः|	with gay adornment fair to see in glorious beauty shine they forth.
उषासावेहसीदताम|	let night and morning rest them here.
परथमा हि सुवाचसा होतारा दैव्या कवी|	let these two sages first of all heralds divine and eloquent.
यज्ञं नो यक्षतामिमम|	perform for us this sacrifice.
भारतीळे सरस्वति या वः सर्वा उपब्रुवे|	you i address sarasvatī and bhāratī and iḷā all.
ता नश्चोदयत शरिये|	urge ye us on to glorious fame.
तवष्टा रूपाणि हि परभुः पशुन विश्वान समानजे|	tvaṣṭar the lord hath made all forms and all the cattle of the field.
तेषां नः सफातिमा यज|	cause them to multiply for us.
उप तमन्या वनस्पते पाथो देवेभ्यः सर्ज|	send to the gods vanaspati thyself the sacrificial draught.
अग्निर्हव्यानि सिष्वदत|	let agni make the oblations sweet.
पुरोगा अग्निर्देवानां गायत्रेण समज्यते|	agni preceder of the gods is honoured with the sacred song.
सवाहाक्र्तीषु रोचते|	he glows at offerings blest with hail.
आ तवेता नि षीदतेन्द्रमभि पर गायत|	o come ye hither sit ye down to indra sing ye forth your song.
सखाय सतोमवाहसः|	companions bringing hymns of praise.
पुरूतमं पुरूणामीशानं वार्याणाम|	to him the richest of the rich the lord of treasures excellent.
इन्द्रं सोमे सचा सुते|	indra with soma juice outpoured.
स घा नो योग आ भुवत स राये स पुरन्ध्याम|	may he stand by us in our need and in abundance for our wealth.
गमद वाजेभिरा स नः|	may he come nigh us with his strength.
यस्य संस्थे न वर्ण्वते हरी समत्सु शत्रवः|	whose pair of tawny horses yoked in battles foemen challenge not.
तस्मा इन्द्राय गायत|	to him to indra sing your song.
सुतपाव्ने सुता इमे शुचयो यन्ति वीतये|	nigh to the somadrinker come for his enjoyment these pure drops.
सोमासो दध्याशिरः|	the somas mingled with the curd.
तवं सुतस्य पीतये सद्यो वर्द्धो अजायथाः|	thou grown at once to perfect strength wast born to drink the soma juice.
इन्द्र जयैष्ठ्याय सुक्रतो|	strong indra for preëminence.
आ तवा विशन्त्वाशवः सोमास इन्द्र गिर्वणः|	o indra lover of the song may these quick somas enter thee.
शं ते सन्तु परचेतसे|	may they bring bliss to thee the sage.
तवां सतोमा अवीव्र्धन तवामुक्था शतक्रतो|	our chants of praise have strengthened thee o Śatakratu and our lauds.
तवां वर्धन्तु नो गिरः|	so strengthen thee the songs we sing.
अक्षितोतिः सनेदिमं वाजमिन्द्रः सहस्रिणम|	indra whose succour never fails accept these viands thousandfold.
यस्मिन विश्वानि पौंस्या|	wherein all manly powers abide.
मा नो मर्ता अभि दरुहन तनूनामिन्द्र गिर्वणः|	o indra thou who lovest song let no man hurt our bodies keep.
ईशानो यवया वधम|	slaughter far from us for thou canst.
तं युञ्जाथां मनसो यो जवीयान तरिवन्धुरो वर्षण यस्त्रिचक्रः|	make ready that which passes thought in swiftness that hath three wheels and triple seat ye mighty.
येनोपयाथः सुक्र्तो दुरोणं तरिधातुन पतथोविर्न पर्णैः|	whereon ye seek the dwelling of the pious whereon threefold ye fly like birds with pinions.
सुव्र्द रथो वर्तते यन्नभि कषां यत तिष्ठथः करतुमन्तानु पर्क्षे|	light rolls your easy chariot faring earthward what time for food ye full of wisdom mount it.
वपुर्वपुष्या सचतामियं गीर्दिवो दुहित्रोषसा सचेथे|	may this song wondrous fair attend your glory ye as ye travel wait on dawn heavens daughter.
आ तिष्ठतं सुव्र्तं यो रथो वामनु वरतानि वर्तते हविष्मान|	ascend your lightly rolling car approaching the worshipper who turns him to his duties.
येन नरा नासत्येषयध्यै वर्तिर्याथस्तनयायत्मने च|	whereon ye come unto the house to quicken man and his offspring o nāsatyas heroes.
मा वां वर्को मा वर्कीरा दधर्षीन मा परि वर्क्तमुतमाति धक्तम|	let not the wolf let not the shewolf harm you forsake me not nor pass me by or others.
अयं वां भागो निहित इयं गीर्दस्राविमे वां निधयो मधूनाम|	here stands your share here is your hymn ye mighty yours are these vessels full of pleasant juices.
युवां गोतमः पुरुमीळ्हो अत्रिर्दस्रा हवतेअवसे हविष्मान|	gotama purumīlha atri bringing oblations all invoke you for protection.
दिशं न दिष्टां रजूयेव यन्ता मे हवं नासत्योप यातम|	like one who goes straight to the point directed ye nāsatyas to mine invocation.
अतारिष्म तमसस पारमस्य परति वां सतोमो अश्विनावधायि|	we have passed oer the limit of this darkness our praise hath been bestowed on you o aśvins.
एह यातं पथिभिर्देवयानैर्वि|	come hitherward by paths which gods have travelled may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
करीळं वः शर्धो मारुतमनर्वाणं रथेशुभम|	sing forth o kaṇvas to your band of maruts unassailable.
कण्वा अभि पर गायत|	sporting resplendent on their car.
ये पर्षतीभिर्र्ष्टिभिः साकं वाशीभिरञ्जिभिः|	they who selfluminous were born together with the spotted deer.
अजायन्त सवभानवः|	spears swords and glittering ornaments.
इहेव शर्ण्व एषां कशा हस्तेषु यद वदान|	one hears as though twere close at hand the cracking of the whips they hold.
नि यामञ्चित्रं रञ्जते|	they gather glory on their way.
पर वः शर्धाय घर्ष्वये तवेषद्युम्नाय शुष्मिणे|	now sing ye forth the godgiven hymn to your exultant marut host.
देवत्तं बरह्म गायत|	the fiercelyvigorous the strong.
पर शंसा गोष्वघ्न्यं करीळं यच्छर्धो मारुतम|	praise ye the bull among the cows for tis the maruts sportive band.
जम्भे रसस्य वाव्र्धे|	it strengthened as it drank the rain.
को वो वर्षिष्ठ आ नरो दिवश्च गमश्च धूतयः|	who is your mightiest heroes when o shakers of the earth and heaven.
यत सीम अन्तं न धूनुथ|	ye shake them like a garments hem.
नि वो यामाय मानुषो दध्र उग्राय मन्यवे|	at your approach man holds him down before the fury of your wrath.
जिहीत पर्वतो गिरिः|	the ruggedjointed mountain yields.
येषाम अज्मेषु पर्थिवी जुजुर्वां इव विश्पतिः|	they at whose racings forth the earth like an ageweakened lord of men.
भिया यामेषु रेजते|	trembles in terror on their ways.
सथिरं हि जानम एषां वयो मातुर निरेतवे|	strong is their birth vigour have they to issue from their mother strength.
यत सीम अनु दविता शवः|	yea even twice enough is theirs.
उद उ तये सूनवो गिरः काष्ठा अज्मेष्व अत्नत|	and these the sons the singers in their racings have enlarged the bounds.
वाश्रा अभिज्ञु यातवे|	so that the kine must walk kneedeep.
तयं चिद घा दीर्घम पर्थुम मिहो नपातम अम्र्ध्रम|	before them on the ways they go they drop this offspring of the cloud.
पर चयावयन्ति यामभिः|	long broad and inexhaustible.
मरुतो यद ध वो बलं जनां अचुच्यवीतन|	o maruts as your strength is great so have ye cast men down on earth.
गिरींर अचुच्यवीतन|	so have ye made the mountains fall.
यद ध यान्ति मरुतः सं ह बरुवते ऽधवन्न आ|	the while the maruts pass along they talk together on the way.
शर्णोति कश चिद एषाम|	doth any hear them as they speak.
पर यात शीभम आशुभिः सन्ति कण्वेषु वो दुवः|	come quick with swift steeds for ye have worshippers among kaṇvas sons.
तत्रो षु मादयाध्वै|	may you rejoice among them well.
अस्ति हि षमा मदाय वः समसि षमा वयम एषाम|	all is prepared for your delight we are their servants evermore.
विश्वं चिद आयुर जीवसे|	to live as long as life may last.
अप नः शोशुचदघमग्ने शुशुग्ध्या रयिम|	chasing with light our sin away o agni shine thou wealth on us.
अप नः शोशुचदघम|	may his light chase our sin away.
सुक्षेत्रिया सुगातुया वसूया च यजामहे|	for goodly fields for pleasant homes for wealth we sacrifice to thee.
अप|	may his light chase our sin away.
पर यद भन्दिष्ठ एषां परास्माकासश्च सूरयः|	best praiser of all these be he foremost our chiefs who sacrifice.
अप|	may his light chase our sin away.
पर यत ते अग्ने सूरयो जायेमहि पर ते वयम|	so that thy worshippers and we thine agni in our sons may live.
अप|	may his light chase our sin away.
पर यदग्नेः सहस्वतो विश्वतो यन्ति भानवः|	as everconquering agnis beams of splendour go to every side.
अप|	may his light chase our sin away.
तवं हि विश्वतोमुख विश्वतः परिभूरसि|	to every side thy face is turned thou art triumphant everywhere.
अप|	may his light chase our sin away.
दविषो नो विश्वतोमुखाति नावेव पारय|	o thou whose face looks every way bear us past foes as in a ship.
अप|	may his light chase our sin away.
स नः सिन्धुमिव नावयाति पर्षा सवस्तये|	as in a ship convey thou us for our advantage oer the flood.
अप|	may his light chase our sin away.
इन्द्रं विश्वा अवीव्र्धन समुद्रव्यचसं गिरः|	all sacred songs have magnified indra expansive as the sea.
रथीतमंरथीनां वाजानां सत्पतिं पतिम|	the best of warriors borne on cars the lord the very lord of strength.
सख्ये त इन्द्र वाजिनो मा भेम शवसस पते|	strong in thy friendship indra lord of power and might we have no fear.
तवामभि परणोनुमो जेतारमपराजितम|	we glorify with praises thee the neverconquered conqueror.
पूर्वीरिन्द्रस्य रातयो न वि दस्यन्त्यूतयः|	the gifts of indra from of old his saving succours never fail.
यदी वाजस्य गोमत सतोत्र्भ्यो मंहते मघम|	when to the praisesingers he gives the boon of substance rich in kine.
पुरां भिन्दुर्युवा कविरमितौजा अजायत|	crusher of forts the young the wise of strength unmeasured was he born.
इन्द्रो विश्वस्यकर्मणो धर्ता वज्री पुरुष्टुतः|	sustainer of each sacred rite indra the thunderer muchextolled.
तवं वलस्य गोमतोअपावरद्रिवो बिलम|	lord of the thunder thou didst burst the cave of vala rich in cows.
तवां देवा अबिभ्युषस्तुज्यमानास आविषुः|	the gods came pressing to thy side and free from terror aided thee.
तवाहं शूर रातिभिः परत्यायं सिन्धुमावदन|	i hero through thy bounties am come to the flood addressing thee.
उपातिष्ठन्त गिर्वणो विदुष टे तस्य कारवः|	songlover here the singers stand and testify to thee thereof.
मायाभिरिन्द्र मायिनं तवं शुष्णमवातिरः|	the wily Śuṣṇa indra thou oerthrewest with thy wondrous powers.
विदुष टे तस्य मेधिरास्तेषां शरवांस्युत तिर|	the wise beheld this deed of thine now go beyond their eulogies.
इन्द्रमीशानमोजसाभि सतोमा अनूषत|	our songs of praise have glorified indra who ruleth by his might.
सहस्रं यस्य रातय उत वा सन्ति भूयसीः|	whose precious gifts in thousands come yea even more abundantly.
वैश्वानरस्य सुमतौ सयाम राजा हि कं भुवनानामभिश्रीः|	still in vaiśvānaras grace may we continue yea he is king supreme oer all things living.
इतो जातो विश्वमिदं वि चष्टे वैश्वानरो यतते सूर्येण|	sprung hence to life upon this all he looketh vaiśvānara hath rivalry with sūrya.
पर्ष्टो दिवि पर्ष्टो अग्निः पर्थिव्यां पर्ष्टो विश्वा ओषधीरा विवेश|	present in heaven in earth allpresent agniall plants that grow on ground hath he pervaded.
वैश्वानरः सहसा पर्ष्टो अग्निः स नो दिवा स रिषः पातु नक्तम|	may agni may vaiśvānara with vigour present preserve us day and night from foemen.
वैश्वानर तव तत सत्यमस्त्वस्मान रायो मघवानः सचन्ताम|	be this thy truth vaiśvānara to usward let wealth in rich abundance gather round us.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
पर मन्महे शवसानाय शूषमाङगूषं गिर्वणसे अङगिरस्वत|	like aṅgiras a gladdening laud we ponder to him who loveth song exceeding mighty.
सुव्र्क्तिभिः सतुवत रग्मियायार्चामार्कं नरे विश्रुताय|	let us sing glory to the farfamed hero who must be praised with fair hymns by the singer.
पर वो महे महि नमो भरध्वमाङगूष्यं शवसानाय साम|	unto the great bring ye great adoration a chant with praise to him exceeding mighty.
येना नः पूर्वे पितरः पदज्ञा अर्चन्तो अङगिरसो गा अविन्दन|	through whom our sires aṅgirases singing praises and knowing well the places found the cattle.
इन्द्रस्याङगिरसां चेष्टौ विदत सरमा तनयाय धासिम|	when indra and the aṅgirases desired it saramā found provision for her offspring.
बर्हस्पतिर्भिनदद्रिं विदद गाः समुस्रियाभिर्वावशन्त नरः|	bṛhaspati cleft the mountain found the cattle the heroes shouted with the kine in triumph.
स सुष्टुभा स सतुभा सप्त विप्रैः सवरेणाद्रिं सवर्यो नवग्वैः|	mid shout loud shout and roar with the navagvas seven singers hast thou heavenly rent the mountain.
सरण्युभिः फलिगमिन्द्र शक्र वलं रवेणदरयो दशग्वैः|	thou hast with speeders with daśagvas indra Śakra with thunder rent obstructive vala.
गर्णानो अङगिरोभिर्दस्म वि वरुषसा सूर्येण गोभिरन्धः|	praised by aṅgirases thou foedestroyer hast with the dawn sun rays dispelled the darkness.
वि भूम्या अप्रथय इन्द्र सानु दिवो रज उपरमस्तभायः|	thou indra hast spread out the earths high ridges and firmly fixed the region under heaven.
तदु परयक्षतममस्य कर्म दस्मस्य चारुतममस्ति दंसः|	this is the deed most worthy of all honour the fairest marvel of the wonderworker.
उपह्वरे यदुपरा अपिन्वन मध्वर्णसो नद्यश्चतस्रः|	that nigh where heaven bends down he made four rivers flow full with waves that carry down sweet water.
दविता वि वव्रे सनजा सनीळे अयास्य सतवमानेभिरर्कैः|	unwearied won with lauding hymns he parted of old the ancient pair united ever.
भगो न मेने परमे वयोमन्नधारयद रोदसी सुदंसाः|	in highest sky like bhaga he the doer of marvels set both dames and earth and heaven.
सनाद दिवं परि भूमा विरूपे पुनर्भुवा युवती सवेभिरेवैः|	still born afresh young dames each in her manner unlike in hue the pair in alternation.
कर्ष्णेभिरक्तोषा रुशद्भिर्वपुर्भिरा चरतो अन्यान्या|	round heaven and earth from ancient time have travelled night with her dark limbs dawn with limbs of splendour.
सनेमि सख्यं सवपस्यमानः सूनुर्दाधार शवसा सुदंसाः|	rich in good actions skilled in operation the son with might maintains his perfect friendship.
आमासु चिद दधिषे पक्वमन्तः पयः कर्ष्णासु रुशद रोहिणीषु|	thou in the raw cows black of hue or ruddy storest the ripe milk glossy white in colour.
सनात सनीला अवनीरवाता वरता रक्षन्ते अम्र्ताः सहोभिः|	their paths of old connected rest uninjured they with great might preserve the immortal statutes.
पुरू सहस्रा जनयो न पत्नीर्दुवस्यन्ति सवसारो अह्रयाणम|	for many thousand holy works the sisters wait on the haughty lord like wives and matrons.
सनायुवो नमसा नव्यो अर्कैर्वसूयवो मतयो दस्म दद्रुः|	thoughts ancient seeking wealth with adoration with newest lauds have sped to thee o mighty.
पतिं न पत्नीरुशतीरुशन्तं सप्र्शन्ति तवा शवसावन्मनीषाः|	as yearning wives cleave to their yearning husband so cleave our hymns to thee o lord most potent.
सनादेव तव रायो गभस्तौ न कषीयन्ते नोप दस्यन्ति दस्म|	strong god the riches which thy hands have holden from days of old have perished not nor wasted.
दयुमानसि करतुमानिन्द्र धीरः शिक्षा शचीवस्तव नः शचीभिः|	splendid art thou o indra wise unbending strengthen us with might o lord of power.
सनायते गोतम इन्द्र नव्यमतक्षद बरह्म हरियोजनाय|	o mighty indra gotamas son nodhas hath fashioned this new prayer to thee eternal.
सुनीथाय नः शवसान नोधाः परातर मक्षू धियावसुर जगम्यात|	sure leader yoker of the tawny coursers may he enriched with prayer come soon and early.
पर तव्यसीं नव्यसीं धीतिमग्नये वाचो मतिं सहसःसूनवे भरे|	to agni i present a newer mightier hymn i bring my words and song unto the son of strength.
अपां नपाद यो वसुभिः सह परियो होता पर्थिव्यां नयसीदद रत्वियः|	who offspring of the waters bearing precious things sits on the earth in season dear invoking priest.
स जायमानः परमे वयोमन्याविरग्निरभवन मातरिश्वने|	soon as he sprang to birth that agni was shown forth to mātariśvan in the highest firmament.
अस्य करत्वा समिधानस्य मज्मना पर दयावा शोचिः पर्थिवी अरोचयत|	when he was kindled through his power and majesty his fiery splendour made the heavens and earth to shine.
अस्य तवेषा अजरा अस्य भानवः सुसन्द्र्शः सुप्रतीकस्यसुद्युतः|	his flames that wax not old beams fair to look upon of him whose face is lovely shine with beauteous sheen.
भात्वक्षसो अत्यक्तुर्न सिन्धवोअग्ने रेजन्ते अससन्तो अजराः|	the rays of agni him whose active force is light through the nights glimmer sleepless ageless like the floods.
यमेरिरे भर्गवो विश्ववेदसं नाभा पर्थिव्या भुवनस्य मज्मना|	send thou with hymns that agni to his own abode who rules one sovran lord of wealth like varuṇa.
अग्निं तं गीर्भिर्हिनुहि सव आ दमे य एको वस्वो वरुणो न राजति|	him allpossessor whom the bhṛgus with their might brought to earths central point the centre of the world.
न यो वराय मरुतामिव सवनः सेनेव सर्ष्टा दिव्या यथाशनिः|	he whom no force can stay even as the maruts roar like to a dart sent forth even as the bolt from heaven.
अग्निर्जम्भैस्तिगितैरत्ति भर्वति योधो न शत्रून स वना नय रञ्जते|	agni with sharpened jaws chews up and eats the trees and conquers them as when the warrior smites his foes.
कुविन नो अग्निरुचथस्य वीरसद वसुष कुविद वसुभिः काममावरत|	and will not agni find enjoyment in our praise will not the vasu grant our wish with gifts of wealth.
चोदः कुवित तुतुज्यात सातये धियः शुचिप्रतीकं तमया धिया गर्णे|	will not the inspirer speed our prayers to gain their end him with the radiant glance i laud with this my song.
घर्तप्रतीकं व रतस्य धूर्षदमग्निं मित्रं न समिधान रञ्जते|	the kindler of the flame wins agni as a friend promoter of the law whose face is bright with oil.
इन्धानो अक्रो विदथेषु दीद्यच्छुक्रवर्णामुदु नो यंसते धियम|	inflamed and keen refulgent in our gatherings he lifts our hymn on high clad in his radiant hues.
अप्रयुछन्नप्रयुछद्भिरग्ने शिवेभिर्नः पायुभिः पाहि शग्मैः|	keep us incessantly with guards that cease not agni with guards auspicious very mighty.
अदब्धेभिरद्र्पितेभिरिष्टेअनिमिषद्भिः परि पाहि नो जाः|	with guards that never slumber never heedless never beguiled o helper keep our children.
वह्निं यशसं विदथस्य केतुं सुप्राव्यं दूतं सद्योर्थम|	as twere some goodly treasure mātariśvan brought as a gift the glorious priest to bhṛgu.
दविजन्मानं रयिमिव परशस्तं रातिं भरद भर्गवेमातरिश्वा|	banner of sacrifice the good protector child of two births the swiftly moving envoy.
अस्य शासुरुभयासः सचन्ते हविष्मन्त उशिजो ये च मर्ताः|	both gods and men obey this rulers order gods who are worshipped men who yearn and worship.
दिवश्चित पूर्वो नयसादि होताप्र्छ्यो विश्पतिर्विक्षुवेधाः|	as priest he takes his seat ere break of morning houselord adorable with men ordainer.
तं नव्यसी हर्द आ जायमानमस्मत सुकीर्तिर्मधुजिह्वमश्याः|	may our fair praise heartborn most recent reach him whose tongue een at his birth is sweet as honey.
यं रत्विजो वर्जने मानुषासः परयस्वन्त आयवो जीजनन्त|	whom mortal priests men with their strong endeavour supplied with dainty viands have created.
उशिक पावको वसुर्मानुषेषु वरेण्यो होताधायि विक्षु|	good to mankind the yearning purifier hath among men been placed as priest choiceworthy.
दमूना गर्हपतिर्दम आ अग्निर्भुवद रयिपती रयीणाम|	may agni be our friend lord of the household protector of the riches in the dwelling.
तं तवा वयं पतिमग्ने रयीणां पर शंसामो मतिभिर्गोतमासः|	as such we gotamas with hymns extol thee o agni as the guardian lord of riches.
आशुं न वाजम्भरं मर्जयन्तः परातर्मक्षू धियावसुर्जगम्यात|	decking thee like a horse the swift prizewinner may he enriched with prayer come soon and early.
हिरण्यकेशो रजसो विसारेअहिर्धुनिर्वात इव धरजीमान|	he in midairs expanse hath golden tresses a raging serpent like the rushing tempest.
शुचिभ्राजा उषसो नवेदा यशस्वतीरपस्युवो न सत्याः|	purely refulgent knowing well the morning like honourable dames true active workers.
आ ते सुपर्णा अमिनन्तमेवैः कर्ष्णो नोनाव वर्षभो यदीदम|	thy wellwinged flashes strengthen in their manner when the black bull hath bellowed round about us.
शिवाभिर्न समयमानाभिरागात पतन्ति मिहः सतनयन्त्यभ्रा|	with drops that bless and seem to smile he cometh the waters fall the clouds utter their thunder.
यदीं रतस्य पयसा पियानो नयन्न्र्तस्य पथिभी रजिष्ठैः|	when he comes streaming with the milk of worship conducting by directest paths of order.
अर्यमा मित्रो वरुनः परिज्मा तवचं पर्ञ्चन्त्युपरस्य योनौ|	aryaman mitra varuṇa parijman fill the hide full where lies the nether pressstone.
अग्ने वाजस्य गोमत ईशानः सहसो यहो|	o agni thou who art the lord of wealth in kine thou son of strength.
अस्मे धेहि जातवेदो महि शरवः|	vouchsafe to us o jātavedas high renown.
स इधनो वसुष कविरग्निरीळेन्यो गिरा|	he agni kindled good and wise must be exalted in our song.
रेवदस्मभ्यम्पुर्वणीक दीदिहि|	shine thou of many forms shine radiantly on us.
कषपो राजन्नुत तमनाग्ने वस्तोरुतोषसः|	o agni shining of thyself by night and when the morning breaks.
स तिग्मजम्भ रक्षसो दह परति|	burn thou whose teeth are sharp against the rākṣasas.
अवा नो अग्न ऊतिभिर्गायत्रस्य परभर्मणि|	adorable in all our rites favour us agni with thine aid.
विश्वासु धीषु वन्द्य|	when the great hymn is chanted forth.
आ नो अग्ने रयिं भर सत्रासाहं वरेण्यम|	bring to us everconquering wealth wealth agni worthy of our choice.
विश्वासु पर्त्सुदुष्टरम|	in all our frays invincible.
आ नो अग्ने सुचेतुना रयिं विश्वायुपोषसम|	give us o agni through thy grace wealth that supporteth all our life.
मार्डीकं धेहि जीवसे|	thy favour so that we may live.
पर पूतास्तिग्मशोचिषे वाचो गोतमाग्नये|	o gotama desiring bliss present thy songs composed with care.
भरस्व सुम्नयुर्गिरः|	to agni of the pointed flames.
यो नो अग्नेअभिदासत्यन्ति दूरे पदीष्ट सः|	may the man fall o agni who near or afar assaileth us.
अस्माकमिद वर्धे भव|	do thou increase and prosper us.
सहस्राक्षो विचर्षणिरग्नी रक्षांसि सेधति|	keen and swift agni thousandeyed chaseth the rākṣasas afar.
होता गर्णीत उक्थ्यः|	he singeth herald meet for lauds.
तवं राजेन्द्र ये च देवा रक्षा नॄन पाह्यसुर तवमस्मान|	thou art the king of all the gods o indra protect the men o asura preserve us.
तवं सत्पतिर्मघवा नस्तरुत्रस्त्वं सत्यो वसवानः सहोदाः|	thou lord of heroes maghavan our saver art faithful very rich the victorygiver.
दनो विश इन्द्र मर्ध्रवाचः सप्त यत पुरः शर्म शारदीर्दर्त|	indra thou humbledst tribes that spake with insult by breaking down seven autumn forts their refuge.
रणोरपो अनवद्यार्णा यूने वर्त्रं पुरुकुत्साय रन्धीः|	thou stirredst blameless billowy floods and gavest his foe a prey to youthful purukutsa.
अजा वर्त इन्द्र शूरपत्नीर्द्यां च येभिः पुरुहूत नूनम|	with whom thou drivest troops whose lords are heroes and bringest daylight now much worshipped indra.
रक्षो अग्निमशुषं तूर्वयाणं सिंहो न दमे अपांसि वस्तोः|	with them guard lionlike wasting active agni to dwell in our tilled fields and in our homestead.
शेषन नु त इन्द्र सस्मिन योनौ परशस्तये पवीरवस्य मह्ना|	they through the greatness of thy spear o indra shall to thy praise rest in this earthly station.
सर्जदर्णांस्यव यद युधा गास्तिष्ठद धरी धर्षता मर्ष्ट वाजान|	to loose the floods to seek for kine the battle his bays he mounted boldly seized the booty.
वह कुत्समिन्द्र यस्मिञ्चाकन सयूमन्यू रज्रा वातस्याश्वा|	indra bear kutsa him in whom thou joyest the darkred horses of the wind are docile.
पर सूरश्चक्रं वर्हतादभीकेअभि सप्र्धो यासिषद्वज्रबाहुः|	let the sun roll his chariot wheel anear us and let the thunderer go to meet the foemen.
जघन्वानिन्द्र मित्रेरूञ्चोदप्रव्र्द्धो हरिवो अदाशून|	thou indra lord of bays made strong by impulse hast slain the vexers of thy friends who give not.
परये पश्यन्नर्यमणं सचायोस्त्वया शूर्ता वहमाना अपत्यम|	they who beheld the friend beside the living were cast aside by thee as they rode onward.
रपत कविरिन्द्रार्कसातौ कषां दासायोपबर्हणीं कः|	indra the bard sang forth in inspiration thou madest earth a covering for the dāsa.
करत तिस्रो मघवा दानुचित्रा नि दुर्योणे कुयवाचं मर्धिश्रेत|	maghavan made the three that gleam with moisture and to his home brought kuyavāc to slay him.
सना ता त इन्द्र नव्या आगुः सहो नभोअविरणाय पूर्वीः|	these thine old deeds new bards have sung o indra thou conqueredst boundest many tribes for ever.
भिनत पुरो न भिदो अदेवीर्ननमो वधरदेवस्य पीयोः|	like castles thou hast crushed the godless races and bowed the godless scorners deadly weapon.
तवं धुनिरिन्द्र धुनिमतीर्र्णोरपः सीरा न सरवन्तीः|	a stormer thou hast made the stormy waters flow down o indra like the running rivers.
पर यत समुद्रमति शूर पर्षि पारया तुर्वशं यदुं सवस्ति|	when oer the flood thou broughtest them o hero thou keptest turvaśa and yadu safely.
तवमस्माकमिन्द्र विश्वध सय अव्र्कतमो नरां नर्पाता|	indra mayst thou be ours in all occasions protector of the men most gentlehearted.
स नो विश्वासां सप्र्धां सहोदा वि|	giving us victory over all our rivals may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
शुक्रः शुशुक्वानुषो न जारः पप्रा समीची दिवो नज्योतिः|	bright splendid like dawns lover he hath filled the two joined worlds as with the light of heaven.
परि परजातः करत्वा बभूथ भुवो देवानां पिता पुत्रः सन|	when born with might thou hast encompassed them father of gods and yet their son wast thou.
वेधा अद्र्प्तो अग्निर्विजानन्नूधर्न गोनां सवाद्मा पितूनाम|	agni the sage the humble who discerns like the cows udder the sweet taste of food.
जने न शेव आहूर्यः सन मध्ये निषत्तो रण्वो दुरोणे|	like a blissgiver to be drawn to men sits gracious in the middle of the house.
पुत्रो न जातो रण्वो दुरोणे वाजी न परीतो विशो वि तारीत|	born in the dwelling like a lovely son pleased like a strong steed he bears on the folk.
विशो यदह्वे नर्भिः सनीळा अग्निर्देवत्वा विश्वान्यश्याः|	what time the men and i with heroes call may agni then gain all through godlike power.
नकिष ट एता वरता मिनन्ति नर्भ्यो यदेभ्यः शरुष्टिं चकर्थ|	none breaks these holy laws of thine when thou hast granted audience to these chieftains here.
तत तु ते दंसो यदहन समानैर्न्र्भिर्यद युक्तो विवे रपांसि|	this is thy boast thou smotest with thy peers and joined with heroes dravest off disgrace.
उषो न जारो विभावोस्रः संज्ञातरूपश्चिकेतदस्मै|	like the dawns lover spreading light wellknown as hued like morn may he remember me.
तमना वहन्तो दुरो वय रण्वन नवन्त विश्वे सवर्द्र्शीके|	they bearing of themselves unbar the doors they all ascend to the fair place of heaven.
अभूदिदं वयुनमो षु भूषता रथो वर्षण्वान मदता मनीषिणः|	this was the task appear promptly ye prudent ones here is the chariot drawn by strong steeds be ye glad.
धियंजिन्वा धिष्ण्या विश्पलावसू दिवो नपात सुक्र्ते शुचिव्रता|	heartstirring longed for succourers of viśpalā here are heavens sons whose sway blesses the pious man.
इन्द्रतमा हि धिष्ण्या मरुत्तमा दस्रा दंसिष्ठा रथ्या रथीतमा|	longed for most indralike mighty most marutlike most wonderful in deed carborne best charioteers.
पूर्णं रथं वहेथे मध्व आचितं तेन दाश्वांसमुप याथो अश्विना|	bring your full chariot hither heaped with liquid sweet thereon ye aśvins come to him who offers gifts.
किमत्र दस्रा कर्णुथः किमासाथे जनो यः कश्चिदहविर्महीयते|	what make ye there ye mighty wherefore linger ye with folk who offering not are held in high esteem.
अति करमिष्टं जुरतं पणेरसुं जयोतिर्विप्राय कर्णुतं वचस्यवे|	pass over them make ye the niggards life decay give light unto the singer eloquent in praise.
जम्भयतमभितो रायतः शुनो हतं मर्धो विदथुस्तान्यश्विना|	crunch up on every side the dogs who bark at us slay ye our foes o aśvins this ye understand.
वाचंवाचं जरितू रत्निनीं कर्तमुभा शंसं नासत्यावतं मम|	make wealthy every word of him who praises you accept with favour both nāsatyas this my laud.
युवमेतं चक्रथुः सिन्धुषु पलवमात्मन्वन्तं पक्षिणन्तौग्र्याय कम|	ye made for tugras son amid the waterfloods that animated ship with wings to fly withal.
येन देवत्रा मनसा निरूहथुः सुपप्तनीपेतथुः कषोदसो महः|	whereon with goddevoted mind ye brought him forth and fled with easy flight from out the mighty surge.
अवविद्धं तौग्र्यमप्स्वन्तरनारम्भणे तमसि परविद्धम|	four ships most welcome in the midst of ocean urged by the aśvins save the son of tugra.
चतस्रो नावो जठलस्य जुष्टा उदश्विभ्यामिषिताः पारयन्ति|	him who was cast down headlong in the waters plunged in the thick inevitable darkness.
कः सविद वर्क्षो निष्ठितो मध्ये अर्णसो यं तौग्र्यो नाधितः पर्यषस्वजत|	what tree was that which stood fixed in surrounding sea to which the son of tugra supplicating clung.
पर्णा मर्गस्य पतरोरिवारभ उदश्विना ऊहथुः शरोमताय कम|	like twigs of which some winged creature may take hold ye aśvins bore him off safely to your renown.
तद वां नरा नासत्यावनु षयाद यद वां मानास उचथमवोचन|	welcome to you be this the hymn of praises uttered by mānas o nāsatyas heroes.
अस्मादद्य सदसः सोम्यादा वि|	from this our gathering where we offer soma may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
सं पूषन्नध्वनस्तिर वयंहो विमुचो नपात|	shorten our ways o pūṣan move aside obstruction in the path.
सक्ष्वा देवप्र णस पुरः|	go close before us cloudborn god.
यो नः पूषन्नघो वर्को दुःशेव आदिदेशति|	drive pūṣan from our road the wolf the wicked inauspicious wolf.
अप सम तम्पथो जहि|	who lies in wait to injure us.
अप तयं परिपन्थिनं मुषीवाणं हुरश्चितम|	who lurks about the path we take the robber with a guileful heart.
दूरमधिस्रुतेरज|	far from the road chase him away.
तवं तस्य दवयाविनोअघशंसस्य कस्य चित|	tread with thy foot and trample out the firebrand of the wicked one.
पदाभि तिष्ठ तपुषिम|	the doubletongued whoeer he be.
आ तत ते दस्र मन्तुमः पूषन्नवो वर्णीमहे|	wise pūṣan wonderworker we claim of thee now the aid wherewith.
येन पितॄनचोदयः|	thou furtheredst our sires of old.
अधा नो विश्वसौभग हिरण्यवाशीमत्तम|	so lord of all prosperity best wielder of the golden sword.
धनानि सुषणा कर्धि|	make riches easy to be won.
अति नः सश्चतो नय सुगा नः सुपथा कर्णु|	past all pursuers lead us make pleasant our path and fair to tread.
पूषन्निहक्रतुं विदः|	o pūṣan find thou power for this.
अभि सूयवसं नय न नवज्वारो अध्वने|	lead us to meadows rich in grass send on our way no early heat.
पू|	o pūṣan find thou power for this.
शग्धि पूर्धि पर यंसि च शिशीहि परास्युदरम|	be gracious to us fill us full give feed us and invigorate.
पू|	o pūṣan find thou power for this.
न पूषणं मेथामसि सूक्तैरभि गर्णीमसि|	no blame have we for pūṣan him we magnify with songs of praise.
वसूनि दस्ममीमहे|	we seek the mighty one for wealth.
अग्निं होतारं मन्ये दास्वन्तं वसुं सूनुं सहसो जातवेदसं विप्रं न जातवेदसम|	agni i hold as herald the munificent the gracious son of strength who knoweth all that live as holy singer knowing all.
य ऊर्ध्वया सवध्वरो देवो देवाच्या कर्पा|	lord of fair rites a god with form erected turning to the gods.
घर्तस्य विभ्राष्टिमनु वष्टि शोचिषाजुह्वानस्य सर्पिषः|	he when the flame hath sprung forth from the holy oil the offered fatness longeth for it with his glow.
यजिष्ठं तवा यजमाना हुवेम जयेष्ठमङगिरसां विप्रमन्मभिर्विप्रेभिः शुक्र मन्मभिः|	we sacrificing call on thee best worshipper the eldest of aṅgirases singer with hymns thee brilliant one with singers hymns.
परिज्मानमिव दयां होतारं चर्षणीनाम|	thee wandering round as t were the sky who art the invoking priest of men.
शोचिष्केशं वर्षणं यमिमा विशः परावन्तु जूतये विशः|	whom bull with hair of flame the people must observe the people that he speed them on.
स हि पुरू चिदोजसा विरुक्मता दीद्यानो भवति दरुहन्तरः परशुर्न दरुहन्तरः|	he with his shining glory blazing far and wide he verily it is who slayeth demon foes slayeth the demons like an axe.
वीळु चिद यस्य सम्र्तौ शरुवद वनेव यत सथिरम|	at whose close touch things solid shake and what is stable yields like trees.
निःषहमाणो यमते नायते धन्वासहा नायते|	subduing all he keeps his ground and flinches not from the skilled archer flinches not.
दर्लःा चिदस्मा अनु दुर्यथा विदे तेजिष्ठाभिररणिभिर्दाष्ट्यवसेअग्नये दाष्ट्यवसे|	to him as one who knows even things solid yield unrough firesticks heated hot he gives his gifts to aid men offer agni gifts for aid.
पर यः पुरूणि गाहते तक्षद वनेव शोचिषा|	he deeply piercing many a thing hews it like wood with fervent glow.
सथिरा चिदन्ना नि रिणात्योजसा नि सथिराणि चिदोजसा|	even hard and solid food he crunches with his might yea hard and solid food with might.
तमस्य पर्क्षमुपरासु धीमहि नक्तं यः सुदर्शतरो दिवातरादप्रायुषे दिवातरात|	here near we place the sacrificial food for him who shines forth fairer in the night than in the day with life then stronger than by day.
आदस्यायुर्ग्रभणवद वीळु शर्म न सूनवे|	his life gives sure and firm defence as that one giveth to a son.
भक्तमभक्तमवो वयन्तो अजरा अग्नयो वयन्तो अजराः|	the during fires enjoy things given and things not given the during fires enjoy as food.
स हि शर्धो न मारुतं तुविष्वणिरप्नस्वतीषूर्वरास्विष्टनिरार्तनास्विष्टनिः|	he roaring very loudly like the maruts host in fertile cultivated fields adorable in desert spots adorable.
आदद धव्यान्याददिर्यज्ञस्य केतुरर्हणा|	accepts and eats our offered gifts ensign of sacrifice by desert.
अध समास्य हर्षतो हर्षीवतो विश्वे जुषन्त पन्थां नरः शुभे न पन्थाम|	so let all joying love his path when he is glad as men pursue a path for bliss.
दविता यदीं कीस्तासो अभिद्यवो नमस्यन्त उपवोचन्त भर्गवो मथ्नन्तो दासा भर्गवः|	even as they who sang forth hymns addressed to heaven the bhṛgus with their prayer and praise invited him the bhṛgus rubbing offering gifts.
अग्निरीशे वसूनां शुचिर्यो धर्णिरेषाम|	for radiant agni lord of all these treasures is exceeding strong.
परियानपिधीन्र्वनिषीष्ट मेधिर आ वनिषीष्ट मेधिरह|	may he the wise accept the grateful coverings the wise accept the coverings.
विश्वासां तवा विशां पतिं हवामहे सर्वासां समानन्दम्पतिं भुजे सत्यगिर्वाहसं भुजे|	thee we invoke the lord of all our settled homes common to all the households guardian to enjoy bearer of true hymns to enjoy.
अतिथिं मानुषाणां पितुर्न यस्यासया|	thee we invoke the guest of men by whose mouth even as a sires.
अमी च विश्वे अम्र्तास आ वयो हव्यादेवेष्वा वयः|	all these immortals come to gain their food of life oblations come to gods as food.
तवमग्ने सहसा सहन्तमः शुष्मिन्तमो जायसे देवतातये रयिर्न देवतातये|	thou agni most victorious with thy conquering strength most mighty one art born for service of the gods like wealth for service of the gods.
शुष्मिन्तमो हि ते मदो दयुम्निन्तम उत करतुः|	most mighty is thine ecstasy most splendid is thy mental power.
अध समा ते परि चरन्त्यजर शरुष्टीवानो नाजर|	therefore men wait upon thee undecaying one like vassals undecaying one.
पर वो महे सहसा सहस्वत उषर्बुधे पशुषे नाग्नये सतोमो बभूत्वग्नये|	to him the mighty conquering with victorious strength to agni walking with the dawn who sendeth kine be sung your laud to agni sung.
परति यदीं हविष्मान विश्वासु कषासु जोगुवे|	as he who with oblation comes calls him aloud in every place.
अग्रे रेभो न जरत रषूणां जूर्णिर्होत रषूणाम|	before the brands of fire he shouteth singerlike the herald kindler of the brands.
स नो नेदिष्ठं दद्र्शान आ भराग्ने देवेभिः सचनाःसुचेतुना महो रायाः सुचेतुना|	agni beheld by us in nearest neighbourhood accordant with the gods bring us with gracious love great riches with thy gracious love.
महि शविष्ठ नस कर्धि संचक्षे भुजे अस्यै|	give us o mightiest what is great to see and to enjoy the earth.
महि सतोत्र्भ्यो मघवन सुवीर्यं मथीरुग्रो न शवसा|	as one of awful power stir up heroic might for those who praise thee bounteous lord.
सुसमिद्धो न आ वह देवानग्ने हविष्मते|	agni wellkindled bring the gods for him who offers holy gifts.
होतः पावक यक्षि च|	worship them purifier priest.
मधुमन्तं तनूनपाद यज्ञं देवेषु नः कवे|	son of thyself present o sage our sacrifice to the gods today.
अद्या कर्णुहि वीतये|	sweet to the taste that they may feast.
नराशंसमिह परियमस्मिन यज्ञ उप हवये|	dear narāśaṁsa sweet of tongue the giver of oblations i.
मधुजिह्वंहविष्क्र्तम|	invoke to this our sacrifice.
अग्ने सुखतमे रथे देवानीळित आ वह|	agni on thy most easy car glorified hither bring the gods.
असि होता मनुर्हितः|	manu appointed thee as priest.
सत्र्णीत बर्हिरानुषग घर्तप्र्ष्ठं मनीषिणः|	strew o ye wise the sacred grass that drips with oil in order due.
यत्राम्र्तस्य चक्षणम|	where the immortal is beheld.
वि शरयन्तां रताव्र्धो दवारो देवीरसश्चतः|	thrown open be the doors divine unfailing that assist the rite.
अद्या नूनं च यष्टवे|	for sacrifice this day and now.
नक्तोषासा सुपेशसास्मिन यज्ञ उप हवये|	i call the lovely night and dawn to seat them on the holy grass.
इदं नो बर्हिरासदे|	at this our solemn sacrifice.
ता सुजिह्वा उप हवये होतारा दैव्या कवी|	the two invokers i invite the wise divine and sweet of tongue.
यज्ञं नो यक्षतामिमम|	to celebrate this our sacrifice.
इळा सरस्वती मही तिस्रो देवीर्मयोभुवः|	iḷā sarasvatī mahī three goddesses who bring delight.
बर्हिः सीदन्त्वस्रिधः|	be seated peaceful on the grass.
इह तवष्टारमग्रियं विश्वरूपमुप हवये|	tvaṣṭar i call the earliest born the wearer of all forms at will.
अस्माकमस्तुकेवलः|	may he be ours and ours alone.
अव सर्जा वनस्पते देव देवेभ्यो हविः|	god sovran of the wood present this our oblation to the gods.
पर दातुरस्तु चेतनम|	and let the giver be renowned.
सवाहा यज्ञं कर्णोतनेन्द्राय यज्वनो गर्हे|	with svāhā pay the sacrifice to indra in the offerers house.
तत्र देवानुप हवये|	thither i call the deities.
एति पर होता वरतमस्य माययोर्ध्वां दधानः शुचिपेशसं धियम|	the priest goes forth to sacrifice with wondrous power sending aloft the hymn of glorious brilliancy.
अभि सरुचः करमते दक्षिणाव्र्तो या अस्य धाम परथमं ह निंसते|	he moves to meet the ladles turning to the right which are the first to kiss the place where he abides.
अभीं रतस्य दोहना अनूषत योनौ देवस्य सदने परीव्र्ताः|	to him sang forth the flowing streams of holy law encompassed in the home and birthplace of the god.
अपामुपस्थे विभ्र्तो यदावसदध सवधा अधयद याभिरीयते|	he when he dwelt extended in the waters lap absorbed those godlike powers for which he is adored.
युयूषतः सवयसा तदिद वपुः समानमर्थं वितरित्रता मिथः|	seeking in course altern to reach the selfsame end the two copartners strive to win this beauteous form.
आदीं भगो न हव्यः समस्मदा वोळ्हुर्न रश्मीन समयंस्त सारथिः|	like bhaga must he be duly invoked by us as he who drives the car holds fast the horses reins.
यमीं दवा सवयसा सपर्यतः समाने योना मिथुना समोकसा|	he whom the two copartners with observance tend the pair who dwell together in the same abode.
दिवा न नक्तं पलितो युवाजनि पुरू चरन्नजरो मानुषा युगा|	by night as in the day the grey one was born young passing untouched by eld through many an age of man.
तमीं हिन्वन्ति धीतयो दश वरिशो देवं मर्तास ऊतये हवामहे|	him the ten fingers the devotions animate we mortals call on him a god to give us help.
धनोरधि परवत आ स रण्वत्यभिव्रजद्भिर्वयुना नवाधित|	he speeds over the sloping surface of the land new deeds hath he performed with those who gird him round.
तवं हयग्ने दिव्यस्य राजसि तवं पार्थिवस्य पशुपा इव तमना|	for agni like a herdsman thou by thine own might rulest oer all that is in heaven and on the earth.
एनी त एते बर्हती अभिश्रिया हिरण्ययी वक्वरी बर्हिराशाते|	and these two mighty ones bright golden closely joined rolling them round are come unto thy sacred grass.
अग्ने जुषस्व परति हर्य तद वचो मन्द्र सवधाव रतजात सुक्रतो|	agni accept with joy be glad in this our prayer joygiver selfsustained strong born of holy law.
यो विश्वतः पर्त्यंं असि दर्शतो रण्वः सन्द्र्ष्टौ पितुमानिव कषयः|	for fair to see art thou turning to every side pleasant to look on as a dwelling filled with food.
परति व एना नमसाहमेमि सूक्तेन भिक्षे सुमतिं तुराणाम|	to you i come with this mine adoration and with a hymn i crave the strong ones favour.
रराणता मरुतो वेद्याभिर्नि हेळो धत्त वि मुचध्वमश्वान|	a hymn that truly makes you joyful maruts suppress your anger and unyoke your horses.
एष व सतोमो मरुतो नमस्वान हर्दा तष्टो मनसा धायि देवाः|	maruts to you this laud with prayer and worship formed in the mind and heart ye gods is offered.
उपेमा यात मनसा जुषाणा यूयं हि षठा नमस इद वर्धासः|	come ye to us rejoicing in your spirit for ye are they who make our prayer effective.
सतुतासो नो मरुतो मर्ळयन्तूत सतुतो मघवा शमभविष्ठः|	the maruts praised by us shall show us favour maghavan lauded shall be most propitious.
ऊर्ध्वा नः सन्तु कोम्या वनान्यहानि विश्वा मरुतो जिगीषा|	maruts may all our days that are to follow be very pleasant lovely and triumphant.
अस्मादहं तविषादीषमाण इन्द्राद भिया मरुतो रेजमानः|	i fled in terror from this mighty indra my body trembling in alarm o maruts.
युष्मभ्यं हव्या निशितान्यासन तान्यारे चक्र्मा मर्ळत नः|	oblations meant for you had been made ready these have we set aside for this forgive us.
येन मानासश्चितयन्त उस्रा वयुष्टिषु शवसा शश्वतीनाम|	by whom the mānas recognize the daysprings by whose strength at the dawn of endless mornings.
स नो मरुद्भिर्व्र्षभ शरवो धा उग्र उग्रेभि सथविरः सहोदाः|	give us thou mighty glory with maruts fierce with the fierce the strong who givest triumph.
तवं पाहीन्द्र सहीयसो नॄन भवा मरुद्भिरवयातहेळाः|	do thou o indra guard the conquering heroes and rid thee of thy wrath against the maruts.
सुप्रकेतेभिः सासहिर्दधानो विद्यामेषं व ज|	with them the wise victorious and bestowing may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
तं पर्छता स जगामा स वेद स चिकित्वानीयते सा नवीयते|	ask ye of him for he is come he knoweth it he full of wisdom is implored is now implored.
तस्मिन सन्ति परशिषस्तस्मिन्निष्टयः स वाजस्य शवसः शुष्मिणस पतिः|	with him are admonitions and with him commands he is the lord of strength the lord of power and might.
तमित पर्छन्ति न सिमो वि पर्छति सवेनेव धीरो मनसा यदग्रभीत|	they ask of him not all learn by their questioning what he the sage hath grasped as twere with his own mind.
न मर्ष्यते परथमं नापरं वचोअस्य करत्वसचते अप्रद्र्पितः|	forgetting not the former nor the later word he goeth on not careless in his mental power.
तमिद गछन्ति जुह्वस्तमर्वतीर्विश्वान्येकः शर्णवद वचांसि मे|	to him these ladles go to him these racing mares he only will give ear to all the words i speak.
पुरुप्रैषस्ततुरिर्यज्ञसाधनोअछिद्रोतिः शिशुरादत्त सं रभः|	allspeeding victor perfecter of sacrifice the babe with flawless help hath mustered vigorous might.
उपस्थायं चरति यत समारत सद्यो जातस्तत्सार युज्येभिः|	whateer he meets he grasps and then runs farther on and straightway newly born creeps forward with his kin.
अभि शवान्तं मर्शते नान्द्ये मुदे यदीं गछन्त्युशतीरपिष्ठितम|	he stirs the wearied man to pleasure and great joy what time the longing gifts approach him as he comes.
स ईं मर्गो अप्यो वनर्गुरुप तवच्युपमस्यां नि धायि|	he is a wild thing of the flood and forest he hath been laid upon the highest surface.
वयब्रवीद वयुना मर्त्येभ्योअग्निर्विद्वान रतचिद धि सत्यः|	he hath declared the lore of works to mortals agni the wise for he knows law the truthful.
पश्वा न तायुं गुहा चतन्तं नमो युजानं नमो वहन्तम|	oneminded wise they tracked thee like a thief lurking in dark cave with a stolen cow.
सजोषा धीराः पदैरनु गमन्नुप तवा सीदन विश्वेयजत्राः|	thee claiming worship bearing it to gods there nigh to thee sate all the holy ones.
रतस्य देवा अनु वरता गुर्भुवत परिष्टिर्द्यौर्न भूम|	the gods approached the ways of holy law there was a gathering vast as heaven itself.
वर्धन्तीमापः पन्वा सुशिश्विं रतस्य योना गर्भे सुजातम|	the waters feed with praise the growing babe born nobly in the womb the seat of law.
पुष्टिर्न रण्वा कषितिर्न पर्थिवी गिरिर्न भुज्म कषोदो न शम्भु|	like grateful food like some wide dwelling place like a fruitbearing hill a wholesome stream.
अत्यो नाज्मन सर्गप्रतक्तः सिन्धुर्न कषोदः क ईं वराते|	like a steed urged to run in swift career rushing like sindhu who may check his course.
जामिः सिन्धूनां भरातेव सवस्रामिभ्यान न राजा वनान्यत्ति|	kin as a brother to his sister floods he eats the woods as a king eats the rich.
यद वातजूतो वना वयस्थादग्निर्ह दाति रोमा पर्थिव्याः|	when through the forest urged by wind he spreads verily agni shears the hair of earth.
शवसित्यप्सु हंसो न सीदन करत्वा चेतिष्ठो विशामुषर्भुत|	like a swan sitting in the floods he pants wisest in mind mid men he wakes at morn.
सोमो न वेधा रतप्रजातः पशुर्न शिश्वा विभुर्दूरेभाः|	a sage like soma sprung from law he grew like some young creature mighty shining far.
युवो रजांसि सुयमासो अश्वा रथो यद वां पर्यर्णांसिदियत|	lightly your coursers travel through the regions when round the sea of air your car is flying.
हिरण्यया वां पवयह परुषायन मध्वः पिबन्ता उषसः सचेथे|	your golden fellies scatter drops of moisture drinking the sweetness ye attend the mornings.
युवमत्यस्याव नक्षथो यद विपत्मनो नर्यस्य परयज्योः|	ye as ye travel overtake the courser who flies apart the friend of man most holy.
सवसा यद वां विश्वगूर्ती भराति वाजायेट्टे मधुपाविषे च|	the prayer is that the sister may convey you all praised meathdrinkers to support and strengthen.
युवं पय उस्रियायामधत्तं पक्वमामायामव पूर्व्यंगोः|	ye have deposited matured within her in the raw cow the first milk of the milchcow.
अन्तर्यद वनिनो वां रतप्सू हवारो न शुचिर्यजते हविष्मान|	which the bright offerer shining like a serpent mid trees presents to you whose form is perfect.
युवं ह घर्मं मधुमन्तमत्रयेअपो न कषोदोअव्र्णीतमेषे|	ye made the fierce heat to be full of sweetness for atri at his wish like streaming water.
तद वां नरावश्विना पश्वैष्टी रथ्येव चक्रा परति यन्ति मध्वः|	fireoffering thence is yours o aśvins heroes your carwheels speed to us like springs of honey.
आ वां दानाय वव्र्तीय दस्रा गोरोहेण तौग्र्यो न जिव्रिः|	like tugras ancient son may i ye mighty bring you to give your gifts with milkoblations.
अपः कषोणी सचते माहिना वां जूर्णो वामक्षुरंहसो यजत्रा|	your greatness compasseth earth heaven and waters decayed for you is sorrows net ye holy.
नि यद युवेथे नियुतः सुदानू उप सवधाभिः सर्जथः पुरन्धिम|	when bounteous ones ye drive your yoked team downward ye send by your own natures understanding.
परेषद वेषद वातो न सूरिरा महे ददे सुव्रतोन वाजम|	swift as the wind let the prince please and feast you he like a pious man gains strength for increase.
वयं चिद धि वां जरितारः सत्या विपन्यामहे वि पणिर्हितावान|	for verily we truthful singers praise you the niggard trafficker is here excluded.
अधा चिद धि षमाश्विनावनिन्द्या पाथो हि षमाव्र्षणावन्तिदेवम|	now even now do ye o blameless aśvins ye mighty guard the man whose god is near him.
युवं चिद धि षमाश्विनावनु दयून विरुद्रस्य परस्रवणस्यसातौ|	you of a truth day after day o aśvins that he might win the very plenteous torrent.
अगस्त्यो नरां नर्षु परशस्तः काराधुनीव चितयत सहस्रैः|	agastya famous among mortal heroes roused with a thousand lauds like sounds of music.
पर यद वहेथे महिना रथस्य पर सयन्द्रा याथो मनुषो न होता|	when with the glory of your car ye travel when we go speeding like the priest of mortals.
धत्तं सूरिभ्य उत व सवश्व्यं नासत्य रयिषाचः सयाम|	and give good horses to sacrificers may we nāsatyas gain our share of riches.
तं वां रथं वयमद्या हुवेम सतोमैरश्विना सुवितायनव्यम|	with songs of praise we call today o aśvins that your new chariot for our own wellbeing.
अरिष्टनेमिं परि दयामियानं वि|	that circles heaven with neverinjured fellies may we find strengthening food in full abundance.
चित्रो वोअस्तु यामश्चित्र ऊती सुदानवः|	wonderful let your coming be wondrous with help ye bounteous ones.
मरुतो अहिभानवः|	maruts who gleam as serpents gleam.
आरे सा वः सुदानवो मरुत रञ्जती शरुः|	far be from us o maruts ye free givers your impetuous shaft.
आरे अश्मा यमस्यथ|	far from us be the stone ye hurl.
तर्णस्कन्दस्य नु विशः परि वर्ङकत सुदानवः|	o bounteous givers touch ye not o maruts tṛṇskandas folk.
ऊर्ध्वान नः कर्त जीवसे|	lift ye us up that we may live.
तत त इन्द्रियं परमं पराचैरधारयन्त कवयः पुरेदम|	that highest indrapower of thine is distant that which is here sages possessed aforetime.
कषमेदमन्यद दिव्यन्यदस्य समी पर्च्यते समनेव केतुः|	this one is on the earth in heaven the other and both unite as flag with flag in battle.
स धारयत पर्थिवीं पप्रथच्च वज्रेण हत्वा निरपः ससर्ज|	he spread the wide earth out and firmly fixed it smote with his thunderbolt and loosed the waters.
अहन्नहिमभिनद रौहिणं वयहन वयंसं मघवा शचीभिः|	maghavan with his puissance struck down ahi rent rauhiṇa to death and slaughtered vyaṁsa.
स जातूभर्मा शरद्दधान ओजः पुरो विभिन्दन्नचरद विदासीः|	armed with his bolt and trusting in his prowess he wandered shattering the forts of dāsas.
विद्वान वज्रिन दस्यवे हेतिमस्यार्यं सहो वर्धया दयुम्नमिन्द्र|	cast thy dart knowing thunderer at the dasyu increase the Āryas might and glory indra.
तदूचुषे मानुषेमा युगानि कीर्तेन्यं मघवा नाम बिभ्रत|	for him who thus hath taught these human races maghavan bearing a fameworthy title.
उपप्रयन दस्युहत्याय वज्री यद ध सूनुः शरवसे नाम दधे|	thunderer drawing nigh to slay the dasyus hath given himself the name of son for glory.
तदस्येदं पश्यता भूरि पुष्टं शरदिन्द्रस्य धत्तन वीर्याय|	see this abundant wealth that he possesses and put your trust in indras hero vigour.
स गा अविन्दत सो अविन्ददश्वान स ओषधीः सोपः स वनानि|	he found the cattle and he found the horses he found the plants the forests and the waters.
भुरिकर्मणे वर्षभाय वर्ष्णे सत्यशुष्माय सुनवाम सोमम|	to him the truly strong whose deeds are many to him the strong bull let us pour the soma.
य आद्र्त्या परिपन्थीव शूरोअयज्वनो विभजन्नेति वेदः|	the hero watching like a thief in ambush goes parting the possessions of the godless.
तदिन्द्र परेव वीर्यं चकर्थ यत ससन्तं वज्रेणाबोधयोअहिम|	well didst thou do that hero deed o indra in waking with thy bolt the slumbering ahi.
अनु तवा पत्नीर्ह्र्षितं वयश्च विश्वे देवासो अमदन्ननु तवा|	in thee delighted dames divine rejoiced them the flying maruts and all gods were joyful.
शुष्णं पिप्रुं कुयवं वर्त्रमिन्द्र यदावधीर्वि पुरःशम्बरस्य|	as thou hast smitten Śuṣṇa pipru vṛtra and kuyava and Śambaras forts o indra.
तन नो|	this prayer of ours may varuṇa grant and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
अग्नीषोमाविमं सु मे शर्णुतं वर्षणा हवम|	agni and soma mighty pair graciously hearken to my call.
परति सूक्तानि हर्यतं भवतं दाशुषे मयः|	accept in friendly wise my hymn and prosper him who offers gifts.
अग्नीषोमा यो अद्य वामिदं वचः सपर्यति|	the man who honours you today agni and soma with this hymn.
तस्मै धत्तं सुवीर्यं गवां पोषं सवश्व्यम|	bestow on him heroic strength increase of kine and noble steeds.
अग्नीषोमा य आहुतिं यो वां दाशाद धविष्क्र्तिम|	the man who offers holy oil and burnt oblations unto you.
स परजया सुवीर्यं विश्वमायुर्व्यश्नवत|	agni and soma shall enjoy great strength with offspring all his life.
अग्नीषोमा चेति तद वीर्यं वां यदमुष्णीतमवसं पणिं गाः|	agni and soma famed is that your prowess wherewith ye stole the kine his food from paṇi.
अवातिरतं बर्सयस्य शेषोअविन्दतं जयोतिरेकं बहुभ्यः|	ye caused the brood of bṛsaya to perish ye found the light the single light for many.
युवमेतानि दिवि रोचनान्यग्निश्च सोम सक्रतू अधत्तम|	agni and soma joined in operation ye have set up the shining lights in heaven.
युवं सिन्धून्रभिशस्तेरवद्यादग्नीषोमावमुञ्चतं गर्भीतान|	from curse and from reproach agni and soma ye freed the rivers that were bound in fetters.
आन्यं दिवो मातरिश्वा जभारामथ्नादन्यं परि शयेनोद्रेः|	one of you mātariśvan brought from heaven the falcon rent the other from the mountain.
अग्नीषोमा बरह्मणा वाव्र्धानोरुं यज्ञाय चक्रथुरु लोकम|	strengthened by holy prayer agni and soma have made us ample room for sacrificing.
अग्नीषोमा हविषः परस्थितस्य वीतं हर्यतं वर्षणा जुषेथाम|	taste agni soma this prepared oblation accept it mighty ones and let it please you.
सुशर्माणा सववसा हि भूतमथा धत्तं यजमानाय शं योः|	vouchsafe us good protection and kind favour grant to the sacrificer health and riches.
यो अग्नीषोमा हविषा सपर्याद देवद्रीचा मनसा यो घर्तेन|	whoso with oil and poured oblation honours with goddevoted heart agni and soma.
तस्य वरतं रक्षतं पातमंहसो विशे जनाय महिशर्म यछतम|	protect his sacrifice preserve him from distress grant to the sacrificer great felicity.
अग्नीषोमा सवेदसा सहूती वनतं गिरः|	invoked together mates in wealth agnisoma accept our hymns.
सं देवत्रा बभूवथुः|	together be among the gods.
अग्नीषोमावनेन वां यो वां घर्तेन दाशति|	agni and soma unto him who worships you with holy oil.
तस्मै दीदयतं बर्हत|	shine forth an ample recompense.
अग्नीषोमाविमानि नो युवं हव्या जुजोषतम|	agni and soma be ye pleased with these oblations brought to you.
आ यातमुपनः सचा|	and come together nigh to us.
अग्नीषोमा पिप्र्तमर्वतो न आ पयायन्तामुस्रिया हव्यसूदः|	agni and soma cherish well our horses and let our cows be fat who yield oblations.
अस्मे बलानि मघवत्सु धत्तं कर्णुतं नो अध्वरं शरुष्टिमन्तम|	grant power to us and to our wealthy patrons and cause our holy rites to be successful.
जातवेदसे सुनवाम सोममरातीयतो नि दहाति वेदः|	for jātavedas let us press the soma may he consume the wealth of the malignant.
स नः पर्षदति दुर्गाणि विश्वा नावेव सिन्धुं दुरितात्यग्निः|	may agni carry us through all our troubles through grief as in a boat across the river.
एन्द्र सानसिं रयिं सजित्वानं सदासहम|	indra bring wealth that gives delight the victors everconquering wealth.
वर्षिष्ठमूतये भर|	most excellent to be our aid.
नि येन मुष्टिहत्यया नि वर्त्रा रुणधामहै|	by means of which we may repel our foes in battle hand to hand.
तवोतासो नयर्वता|	by thee assisted with the car.
इन्द्र तवोतास आ वयं वज्रं घना ददीमहि|	aided by thee the thunderarmed indra may we lift up the bolt.
जयेम सं युधि सप्र्धः|	and conquer all our foes in fight.
वयं शूरेभिरस्त्र्भिरिन्द्र तवया युजा वयम|	with thee o india for ally with missiledarting heroes may.
सासह्याम पर्तन्यतः|	we conquer our embattled foes.
महानिन्द्रः परश्च नु महित्वमस्तु वज्रिणे|	mighty is indra yea supreme greatness be his the thunderer.
दयौर्नप्रथिना शवः|	wide as the heaven extends his power.
समोहे वा य आशत नरस्तोकस्य सनितौ|	which aideth those to win them sons who come as heroes to the fight.
विप्रासो वा धियायवः|	or singers loving holy thoughts.
यः कुक्षिः सोमपातमः समुद्र इव पिन्वते|	his belly drinking deepest draughts of soma like an ocean swells.
उर्वीरापो न काकुदः|	like wide streams from the cope of heaven.
एवा हयस्य सून्र्ता विरप्शी गोमती मही|	so also is his excellence great vigorous rich in cattle like.
पक्वा शाखा न दाशुषे|	a ripe branch to the worshipper.
एवा हि ते विभूतय ऊतय इन्द्र मावते|	for verily thy mighty powers indra are saving helps at once.
सद्यश्चित सन्तिदाशुषे|	unto a worshipper like me.
एवा हयस्य काम्या सतोम उक्थं च शंस्या|	so are his lovely gifts let lauds and praises be to indra sung.
इन्द्राय सोमपीतये|	that he may drink the soma juice.
रयिर्न यः पित्र्वित्तो वयोधाः सुप्रणीतिश्चिकितुषो नशासुः|	he who gives food like patrimonial riches and guides aright like some wise mans instruction.
सयोनाशीरतिथिर्न परीणानो होतेव सद्म विधतो वि तारीत|	loved like a guest who lies in pleasant lodgingmay he as priest prosper his servants dwelling.
देवो न यः सविता सत्यमन्मा करत्वा निपाति वर्जनानि विश्वा|	he who like savitar the god trueminded protecteth with his power all acts of vigour.
पुरुप्रशस्तो अमतिर्न सत्य आत्मेव शेवो दिधिषाय्यो भूत|	truthful like splendour glorified by many like breath joygivingall must strive to win him.
देवो न यः पर्थिवीं विश्वधाया उपक्षेति हितमित्रो न राजा|	he who on earth dwells like a king surrounded by faithful friends like a god allsustaining.
पुरःसदः शर्मसदो न वीरा अनवद्या पतिजुष्टेव नारी|	like heroes who preside who sit in safety like as a blameless dame dear to her husband.
तं तवा नरो दम आ नित्यमिद्धमग्ने सचन्त कषितिषु धरुवासु|	thee such in settlements secure o agni our men serve ever kindled in each dwelling.
अधि दयुम्नं नि दधुर्भूर्यस्मिन भवा विश्वायुर्धरुणो रयीणाम|	on him have they laid splendour in abundance dear to all men bearer be he of riches.
वि पर्क्षो अग्ने मघवानो अश्युर्वि सूरयो ददतो विश्वमायुः|	may thy rich worshippers win food o agni and princes gain long life who bring oblation.
सनेम वाजं समिथेष्वर्यो भागं देवेषु शरवसेदधानाः|	may we get booty from our foe in battle presenting to the gods their share for glory.
रतस्य हि धेनवो वावशानाः समदूध्नीः पीपयन्त दयुभक्ताः|	the cows of holy law sent us by heaven have swelled with laden udders loudly lowing.
परावतः सुमतिं भिक्षमाणा वि सिन्धवः समया सस्रुरद्रिम|	soliciting his favour from a distance the rivers to the rock have flowed together.
तवे अग्ने सुमतिं भिक्षमाणा दिवि शरवो दधिरे यज्ञियासः|	agni with thee soliciting thy favour the holy ones have gained glory in heaven.
नक्ता च चक्रुरुषसा विरूपे कर्ष्णं च वर्णमरुणं च सं धुः|	they made the night and dawn of different colours and set the black and purple hues together.
यान राये मर्तान सुषूदो अग्ने ते सयाम मघवानो वयं च|	may we and those who worship be the mortals whom thou o agni leadest on to riches.
छायेव विश्वं भुवनं सिसक्ष्यापप्रिवान रोदसी अन्तरिक्षम|	thou hast filled earth and heaven and airs midregion and followest the whole world like a shadow.
अर्वद्भिरग्ने अर्वतो नर्भिर्नॄन वीरैर्वीरान वनुयामा तवोताः|	aided by thee o agni may we conquer steeds with steeds men with men heroes with heroes.
ईशानासः पित्र्वित्तस्य रायो वि सूरयः शतहिमा नो अश्युः|	lords of the wealth transmitted by our fathers and may our princes live a hundred winters.
एता ते अग्न उचथानि वेधो जुष्टानि सन्तु मनसे हर्दे च|	may these our hymns of praise agni ordainer be pleasant to thee in thy heart and spirit.
शकेम रायः सुधुरो यमं तेअधि शरवो देवभक्तं दधानाः|	may we have power to hold thy steeds of riches laying on thee the godsent gift of glory.
पुरो वो मन्द्रं दिव्यं सुव्र्क्तिं परयति यज्ञे अग्निमध्वरेदधिध्वम|	install at sacrifice while the rite advances your pleasant heavenly agni meet for praises.
पुर उक्थेभिः स हि नो विभावा सवध्वरा करति जातवेदाः|	with hymnsfor he illumines usinstall him he jātavedas makes our rites successful.
तमु दयुमः पुर्वणीक होतरग्ने अग्निभिर्मनुष इधानः|	hear this laud radiant priest of many aspects o agni with the fires of man enkindled.
सतोमं यमस्मै ममतेव शूषं घर्तं न शुचि मतयः पवन्ते|	laud which bards send forth pure as sacred butter strength to this man as twere for selfadvantage.
पीपाय स शरवसा मर्त्येषु यो अग्नये ददाश विप्र उक्थैः|	mid mortal men that singer thrives in glory who offers gifts with hymns of praise to agni.
चित्राभिस्तमूतिभिश्चित्रशोचिर्व्रजस्य साता गोमतो दधाति|	and the god wondrous bright with wondrous succours helps him to win a stable filled with cattle.
आ यः पप्रौ जायमान उर्वी दूरेद्र्शा भासा कर्ष्णाध्वा|	he at his birth whose path is black behind him filled heaven and earth with farapparent splendour.
अध बहु चित तम ऊर्म्यायास्तिरः शोचिषा दद्र्शे पावकः|	and he himself hath been through nights thick darkness made manifest by light the purifier.
नू नश्चित्रं पुरुवाजाभिरूती अग्ने रयिं मघवद्भ्यश्च धेहि|	with thy most mighty aid confer o agni wonderful wealth on us and on our princes.
ये राधसा शरवसा चात्यन्यान सुवीर्येभिश्चाभि सन्ति जनान|	who stand preeminent surpassing others in liberal gifts in fame and hero virtues.
इमं यज्ञं चनो धा अग्न उशन यं त आसानो जुहुते हविष्मान|	agni accept this sacrifice with gladness which seated here the worshipper presenteth.
भरद्वाजेषु दधिषे सुव्र्क्तिमवीर्वाजस्य गध्यस्य सातौ|	fair hymns hadst thou among the bharadvājas and holpest them to gain abundant vigour.
वि दवेषांसीनुहि वर्धयेळां मदेम शतहिमाः सुवीराः|	scatter our foes increase our store may we he glad a hundred winters with brave sons.
इन्द्र पिब तुभ्यं सुतो मदायाव सय हरी वि मुचा सखाया|	drink indra juice is shed to make thee joyful loose thy bay steeds and give thy friends their freedom.
उत पर गाय गण आ निषद्याथा यज्ञाय गर्णते वयो धाः|	begin the song seated in our assembly give strength for sacrifice to him who singeth.
अस्य पिब यस्य जज्ञान इन्द्र मदाय करत्वे अपिबो विरप्शिन|	drink thou of this whereof at birth o indra thou drankest mighty one for power and rapture.
तमु ते गावो नर आपो अद्रिरिन्दुं समह्यन पीतये समस्मै|	the men the pressingstones the cows the waters have made this soma ready for thy drinking.
समिद्धे अग्नौ सुत इन्द्र सोम आ तवा वहन्तु हरयो वहिष्ठाः|	the fire is kindled soma pressed o indra let thy bays best to draw convey thee hither.
तवायता मनसा जोहवीमीन्द्रा याहि सुविताय महे नः|	with mind devoted indra i invoke thee come for our great prosperity approach us.
आ याहि शश्वदुशता ययाथेन्द्र महा मनसा सोमपेयम|	indra come hither evermore thou camest through our great strong desire to drink the soma.
उप बरह्माणि शर्णव इमा नोअथा ते यज्ञस्तन्वे वयो धात|	listen and hear the prayers which now we offer and let this sacrifice increase thy vigour.
यदिन्द्र दिवि पार्ये यद रधग यद वा सवे सदने यत्र वासि|	mayst thou o indra on the day of trial present or absent wheresoe’er thou dwellest.
अतो नो यज्ञमवसे नियुत्वान सजोषाः पाहि गिर्वणो मरुद्भिः|	thence with thy team accordant with the maruts songlover guard our sacrifice to help us.
अभूरेको रयिपते रयीणामा हस्तयोरधिथा इन्द्र कर्ष्टीः|	sole lord of wealth art thou o lord of riches thou in thine hands hast held the people indra.
वि तोके अप्सु तनये च सूरेअवोचन्त चर्षणयो विवाचः|	men have invoked thee with contending voices for seed and waters progeny and sunlight.
तवद भियेन्द्र पार्थिवानि विश्वाच्युता चिच्च्यावयन्ते रजांसि|	through fear of thee o indra all the regions of earth though naught may move them shake and tremble.
दयावाक्षामा पर्वतासो वनानि विश्वं दर्ळ्हं भयते अज्मन्ना ते|	all that is firm is frightened at thy coming the earth the heaven the mountain and the forest.
तवं कुत्सेनाभि शुष्णमिन्द्राशुषं युध्य कुयवं गविष्टौ|	with kutsa indra thou didst conquer Śuṣṇa voracious bane of crops in fight for cattle.
दश परपित्वे अध सूर्यस्य मुषायश्चक्रमविवेरपांसि|	in the close fray thou rentest him thou stolest the suns wheel and didst drive away misfortunes.
तवं शतान्यव शम्बरस्य पुरो जघन्थाप्रतीनि सस्योः|	thou smotest to the ground the hundred castles impregnable of Śambara the dasyu.
अशिक्षो यत्र शच्या शचीवो दिवोदासाय सुन्वते सुतक्रे भरद्वाजाय गर्णते वसूनि|	when strong with might thou holpest divodāsa who poured libations out o somabuyer and madest bharadvāja rich who praised thee.
स सत्यसत्वन महते रणाय रथमा तिष्ठ तुविन्र्म्ण भीमम|	as such true hero for great joy of battle mount thy terrific car o brave and manly.
याहि परपथिन्नवसोप मद्रिक पर च शरुत शरावय चर्षणिभ्यः|	come with thine help to me thou distant roamer and glorious god spread among men my glory.
पर नव्यसा सहसः सूनुमछा यज्ञेन गातुमव इछमानः|	he who seeks furtherance and grace to help him goes to the son of strength with newest worship.
वर्श्चद्वनं कर्ष्णयामं रुशन्तं वीती होतारन्दिव्यं जिगाति|	calling the heavenly priest to share the banquet who rends the wood bright with his blackened pathway.
स शवितानस्तन्यतू रोचनस्था अजरेभिर्नानदद्भिर्यविष्ठः|	whitehued and thundering he dwells in splendour most youthful with the loudvoiced and eternal.
यः पावकः पुरुतमः पुरूणि पर्थून्यग्निरनुयाति भर्वन|	agni most variform the purifier who follows crunching many ample forests.
वि ते विष्वग वातजूतासो अग्ने भामासः शुचे शुचयश्चरन्ति|	incited by the wind thy flames o agni move onward pure one pure in all directions.
तुविम्रक्षासो दिव्या नवग्वा वना वनन्ति धर्षता रुजन्तः|	thy most destructive heavenly navagvas break the woods down and devastate them boldly.
ये ते शुक्रासः शुचयः शुचिष्मः कषां वपन्ति विषितासो अश्वाः|	thy pure white horses from their bonds are loosened o radiant one they shear the ground beneath them.
अध भरमस्त उर्विया वि भाति यातयमानो अधि सानु पर्श्नेः|	and far and wide shines out thy flame and flickers rapidly moving over earths high ridges.
अध जिह्वा पापतीति पर वर्ष्णो गोषुयुधो नाशनिः सर्जाना|	forth darts the bulls tongue like the sharp stone weapon discharged by him who fights to win the cattle.
शूरस्येव परसितिः कषातिरग्नेर्दुर्वर्तुर्भीमो दयते वनानि|	agnis fierce flame is like a heros onset dread and resistless he destroys the forests.
आ भानुना पार्थिवानि जरयांसि महस्तोदस्य धर्षता ततन्थ|	thou with the sunlight of the great impeller hast boldly overspread the earths expanses.
स बाधस्वाप भया सहोभि सप्र्धो वनुष्यन वनुषो नि जूर्व|	so drive away with conquering might all perils fighting out foemen burn up those who harm us.
स चित्र चित्रं चितयन्तमस्मे चित्रक्षत्र चित्रतमं वयोधाम|	wondrous of wondrous power give to the singer wealth wondrous marked most wonderful lifegiving.
चन्द्रं रयिं पुरुवीरं बर्हन्तं चन्द्र चन्द्राभिर्ग्र्णते युवस्व|	wealth bright o bright one vast with many heroes give with thy bright flames to the man who lauds thee.
अग्ने स कषेषद रतपा रतेजा उरु जयोतिर्नशते देवयुष टे|	true guardian of the law thy faithful servant wins ample light and dwells in peace o agni.
यं तवं मित्रेण वरुणः सजोषा देव पासि तयजसा मर्तमंहः|	whom thou as varuṇa in accord with mitra guardest o god by banishing his trouble.
ईजे यज्ञेभिह शशमे शमीभिर्र्धद्वारायाग्नये ददाश|	he hath paid sacrifices toiled in worship and offered gifts to wealthincreasing agni.
एवा चन तं यशसामजुष्टिर्नांहो मर्तं नशते न परद्र्प्तिः|	him the displeasure of the famous moves not outrage and scorn affect not such a mortal.
सूरो न यस्य दर्शतिररेपा भीमा यदेति शुचतस्त आ धीः|	bright god whose look is free from stain like sūryas thou swift what time thou earnestly desirest.
हेषस्वतः शुरुधो नायमक्तोः कुत्रा चिद रण्वो वसतिर्वनेजाः|	hast gear to give us come with joy at evening where child of wood thou mayest also tarry.
तिग्मं चिदेम महि वर्पो अस्य भसदश्वो न यमसान आसा|	fierce is his gait and vast his wondrous body he champeth like a horse with bit and bridle.
विजेहमानः परशुर्न जिह्वां दरविर्न दरावयति दारु धक्षत|	and darting forth his tongue as twere a hatchet burning the woods smelteth them like a smelter.
स इदस्तेव परति धादसिष्यञ्छिशीत तेजोअयसो न धाराम|	archerlike fain toshoot he sets his arrow and whets his splendour like the edge of iron.
चित्रध्रजतिररतिर्यो अक्तोर्वेर्न दरुषद्वा रघुपत्मजंहाः|	the messenger of night with brilliant pathway like a treeroosting bird of rapid pinion.
स ईं रेभो न परति वस्त उस्राः शोचिषा रारपीति मित्रमहाः|	in beams of morn he clothes him like the singer and bright as mitra with his splendour crackles.
नक्तं य ईमरुषो यो दिवा नॄनमर्त्यो अरुषो यो दिवा नॄन|	red in the night by day the mens possession red he belongs to men by day immortal.
दिवो न यस्य विधतो नवीनोद वर्षा रुक्ष ओषधीषु नूनोत|	like heavens when scattering beams his voice was uttered among the plants the radiant hero shouted.
घर्णा न यो धरजसा पत्मना यन्ना रोदसी वसुनादं सुपत्नी|	who with his glow in rapid course came hither to fill both worlds wellwedded dames with treasure.
धायोभिर्वा यो युज्येभिरर्कैर्विद्युन न दविद्योत सवेभिःशुष्मैह|	who with supporting streams and rays that suit him hath flashed like lightning with his native vigour.
शर्धो वा यो मरुतां ततक्ष रभुर्न तवेषोरभसानो अद्यौत|	like the deft maker of the band of maruts the bright impetuous one hath shone refulgent.
घर्तवती भुवनानामभिश्रियोर्वी पर्थ्वी मधुदुघे सुपेशसा|	filled full of fatness compassing all things that be wide spacious dropping meath beautiful in their form.
दयावाप्र्थिवी वरुणस्य धर्मणा विष्कभिते अजरेभूरिरेतसा|	the heaven and the earth by varuṇas decree unwasting rich in germs stand parted each from each.
असश्चन्ती भूरिधारे पयस्वती घर्तं दुहाते सुक्र्ते शुचिव्रते|	the everlasting pair with full streams rich in milk in their pure rule pour fatness for the pious man.
राजन्ती अस्य भुवनस्य रोदसी अस्मे रेतः सिञ्चतंयन मनुर्हितम|	ye who are regents of this world o earth and heaven pour into us the genial flow that prospers meit.
यो वां रजवे करमणाय रोदसी मर्तो ददाश धिषणे स साधति|	whoso for righteous life pours offerings to you o heaven and earth ye hemispheres that man succeeds.
पर परजाभिर्जायते धर्मणस परि युवोः सिक्ता विषुरूपाणि सव्रता|	he in his seed is born again and spreads by law from you flow things diverse in form but ruled alike.
घर्तेन दयावाप्र्थिवी अभीव्र्ते घर्तश्रिया घर्तप्र्चा घर्ताव्र्धा|	enclosed in fatness heaven and earth are bright therewith they mingle with the fatness which they still increase.
उर्वी पर्थ्वी होत्र्वूर्ये पुरोहिते ते इद विप्रा ईळते सुम्नमिष्टये|	wide broad set foremost at election of the priest to them the singers pray for bliss to further them.
मधु नो दयावाप्र्थिवी मिमिक्षतां मधुश्चुता मधुदुघे मधुव्रते|	may heaven and earth pour down the balmy rain for us balmdropping yielding balm with balm upon your path.
दधाने यज्ञं दरविणं च देवता महि शरवो वाजमस्मे सुवीर्यम|	bestowing by your godhead sacrifice and wealth great fame and strength for us and good heroic might.
ऊर्जं नो दयौश्च पर्थिवी च पिन्वतां पिता माता विश्वविदा सुदंससा|	may heaven and earth make food swell plenteously for us allknowing father jother wondrous in their works.
संरराणे रोदसी विश्वशम्भुवा सनिं वाजं रयिमस्मे समिन्वताम|	pouring out bounties may in union both the worlds all beneficial send us gain and power and wealth.
या त ऊतिरवमा या परमा या मध्यमेन्द्र शुष्मिन्नस्ति|	with thine assistance o thou mighty indra be it the least the midmost or the highest.
ताभिरू षु वर्त्रहत्येअवीर्न एभिश्च वाजैर्महान्न उग्र|	great with those aids and by these powers support us strong god in battle that subdues our foemen.
आभि सप्र्धो मिथतीररिषण्यन्नमित्रस्य वयथया मन्युमिन्द्र|	with these discomfit hosts that fight against us and check the opponents wrath thyself uninjured.
आभिर्विश्वा अभियुजो विषूचीरार्याय विशोअव तारीर्दासीः|	with these chase all our foes to every quarter subdue the tribes of dāsas to the Ārya.
इन्द्र जामय उत येअजामयोअर्वाचीनासो वनुषो युयुज्रे|	those who array themselves as foes to smite us o indra be they kin or be they strangers.
तवमेषां विथुरा शवांसि जहि वर्ष्ण्यानि कर्णुही पराचः|	strike thou their manly strength that it be feeble and drive in headlong flight our foemen backward.
शूरो वा शूरं वनते शरीरैस्तनूरुचा तरुषि यत कर्ण्वैते|	with strength of limb the hero slays the hero when bright in arms they range them for the combat.
तोके वा गोषु तनये यदप्सु वि करन्दसी उर्वरासु बरवैते|	when two opposing hosts contend in battle for seed and offspring waters kine or cornlands.
नहि तवा शूरो न तुरो न धर्ष्णुर्न तवा योधो मन्यमानो युयोध|	yet no strong man hath conquered thee no hero no brave no warrior trusting in his valour.
इन्द्र नकिष टवा परत्यस्त्येषां विश्वा जातान्यभ्यसि तानि|	not one of these is match for thee o indra thou far surpassest all these living creatures.
स पत्यत उभयोर्न्र्म्णमयोर्यदी वेधसः समिथे हवन्ते|	he is the lord of both these armies valour when the commanders call them to the conflict.
वर्त्रे वा महो नर्वति कषये वा वयचस्वन्ता यदि वितन्तसैते|	when with their ranks expanded they are fighting with a great foe or for a home with heroes.
अध समा ते चर्षणयो यदेजानिन्द्र तरातोत भवा वरूता|	and when the people stir themselves for battle be thou their saviour indra and protector.
अस्माकासो ये नर्तमासो अर्य इन्द्र सूरयो दधिरे पुरोनः|	and theirs thy manliest of our friends the pious the chiefs who have installed us priests o indra.
अनु ते दायि मह इन्द्रियाय सत्रा ते विष्वमनु वर्त्रहत्ये|	to thee for high dominion hath been for evermore for slaughtering the vṛtras.
अनु कषत्रमनु सहो यजत्रेन्द्र देवेभिरनु ते नर्षह्ये|	all lordly power and might o holy indra given by gods for victory in battle.
एवा न सप्र्धः समजा समत्स्विन्द्र रारन्धि मिथतीरदेवीः|	so urge our hosts together in the combats yield up the godless bands that fight against us.
विद्याम वस्तोरवसा गर्णन्तो भरद्वाजा उत त इन्द्र नूनम|	singing at morn may we find thee with favour yea indra and een now we bharadvājas.
इन्द्रासोमा महि तद वां महित्वं युवं महानि परथमानि चक्रथुः|	great is this might of yours indra and soma the first high exploits were your own achievements.
युवं सूर्यं विविदथुर्युवं सवर्विश्वा तमांस्यहतं निदश्च|	ye found the sun ye found the light of heaven ye killed all darkness and the gods blasphemers.
इन्द्रासोमा वासयथ उषासमुत सूर्यं नयथो जयोतिषा सह|	ye indrasoma gave her light to morning and led the sun on high with all his splendour.
उप दयां सकम्भथुः सकम्भनेनाप्रथतं पर्थिवीं मातरं वि|	ye stayed the heaven with a supporting pillar and spread abroad apart the earth the mother.
इन्द्रासोमावहिमपः परिष्ठां हथो वर्त्रमनु वां दयौरमन्यत|	ye slew the flood obstructing serpent vṛtra indra and soma heaven approved your exploit.
परार्णांस्यैरयतं नदीनामा समुद्राणिपप्रथुः पुरूणि|	ye urged to speed the currents of the rivers and many seas have ye filled full with waters.
इन्द्रासोमा पक्वमामास्वन्तर्नि गवामिद दधथुर्वक्षणासु|	ye in the unripe udders of the milchkine have set the ripe milk indra thou and soma.
जग्र्भथुरनपिनद्धमासु रुशच्चित्रासु जगतीष्वन्तः|	ye have held fast the unimpeded whiteness within these manycoloured moving creatures.
इन्द्रासोमा युवमङग तरुत्रमपत्यसाचं शरुत्यं रराथे|	verily ye bestow indra and soma wealth famed victorious passing to our children.
युवं शुष्मं नर्यं चर्षणिभ्यः सं विव्यथुः पर्तनाषाहमुग्रा|	ye have invested men ye mighty beings with manly strength that conquers in the battle.
सतुषे जनं सुव्रतं नव्यसीभिर्गीर्भिर्मित्रावरुणा सुम्नयन्ता|	i laud with newest songs the righteous people mitra and varuṇa who make us happy.
त आ गमन्तु त इह शरुवन्तु सुक्षत्रासो वरुणोमित्रो अग्निः|	let them approach here let them listenagni varuṇa mitra lords of fair dominion.
विशोविश ईड्यमध्वरेष्वद्र्प्तक्रतुमरतिं युवत्योः|	him to be praised at each tribes sacrifices the two young matrons soberminded herald.
दिवः शिशुं सहसः सूनुमग्निं यज्ञस्य केतुमरुषं यजध्यै|	the son of strength the child of heaven the signal of sacrifice red agni will i worship.
अरुषस्य दुहितरा विरूपे सत्र्भिरन्या पिपिशे सूरो अन्या|	unlike in form are the red gods two daughters one is the suns and stars bedeck the other.
मिथस्तुरा विचरन्ती पावके मन्म शरुतं नक्षत रच्यमाने|	apart the sanctifiers in succession come to the famed hymn praised in holy verses.
पर वायुमछा बर्हती मनीषा बर्हद्रयिं विश्ववारं रथप्राम|	i with a lofty song call hither vāyu allbounteous filler of his car most wealthy.
दयुतद्यामा नियुतः पत्यमानः कविः कविमियक्षसि परयज्यो|	thou sage with bright path lord of harnessed horses impetuous promptly honourest the prudent.
स मे वपुश्छदयदश्विनोर्यो रथो विरुक्मान मनसा युजानः|	that chariot of the aśvins fair to look on pleaseth me well yoked with a thought refulgent.
येन नरा नासत्येषयध्यै वर्तिर्याथस्तनयाय तमने च|	wherewith nāsatyas chiefs ye seek our dwelling to give new strength to us and to our children.
पर्जन्यवाता वर्षभा पर्थिव्याः पुरीषाणि जिन्वतमप्यानि|	bulls of the earth o vāta and parjanya stir up for us the regions of the water.
सत्यश्रुतः कवयो यस्य गीर्भिर्जगत सथातर्जगदाक्र्णुध्वम|	hearers of truth ye sages worldsupporters increase his living wealth whose songs delight you.
पावीरवी कन्या चित्रायुः सरस्वती वीरपत्नी धियं धात|	so may sarasvatī the heros consort brisk with rare life the lightnings child inspire us.
गनाभिरछिद्रं शरणं सजोषा दुराधर्षं गर्णते शर्म यंसत|	and with the dames accordant give the singer a refuge unassailable and flawless.
पथसपथः परिपतिं वचस्या कामेन कर्तो अभ्यानळ अर्कम|	i praise with eloquence him who guards all pathways he when his love impelled him went to arka.
स नो रासच्छुरुधश्चन्द्राग्रा धियंधियं सीषधाति पर पूषा|	may he vouchsafe us gear with gold to grace it may pūṣan make each prayer of ours efective.
परथमभाजं यशसं वयोधां सुपाणिं देवं सुगभस्तिं रभ्वम|	may herald agni fulgent bring for worship tvaṣṭar adored in homes and swift to listen.
होता यक्षद यजतं पस्त्यानामग्निस्त्वष्टारं सुहवं विभावा|	glorious first to share the lifebestower the ever active god fairarmed fairhanded.
भुवनस्य पितरं गीर्भिराभी रुद्रं दिवा वर्धया रुद्रमक्तौ|	rudra by day rudra at night we honour with these our songs the universes father.
बर्हन्तं रष्वमजरं सुषुम्नं रधग घुवेम कविनेषितासः|	him great and lofty blissful undecaying let us call specially as the sage impels us.
आ युवानः कवयो यज्ञियासो मरुतो गन्त गर्णतो वरस्याम|	ye who are youthful wise and meet for worship come martits to the longing of the singer.
अचित्रं चिद धि जिन्वथा वर्धन्त इत्था नक्षन्तो नरो अङगिरस्वत|	coming as erst to aṅgiras o heroes ye animate and quicken een the desert.
पर वीराय पर तवसे तुरायाजा यूथेव पशुरक्षिरस्तम|	even as the herdsman driveth home his cattle i urge my songs to him the strong swift hero.
स पिस्प्र्शति तन्वि शरुतस्य सत्र्भिर्न नाकं वचनस्यविपः|	may he the glorious lay upon his body the singers hymns as stars bedeck the heaven.
यो रजांसि विममे पार्थिवानि तरिश्चिद विष्णुर्मनवे बाधिताय|	he who for mans behoof in his afiliction thrice measured out the earthly regions viṣṇu.
तस्य ते शर्मन्नुपदद्यमाने राया मदेम तन्वा तना च|	when one so great as thou affordeth shelter may we with wealth and with ourselves be happy.
तन नोअहिर्बुध्न्यो अब्धिरर्कैस्तत पर्वतस्तत सविता चनो धात|	sweet be this song of mine to ahibudhnya parvata savitar with floods and lightnings.
तदोषधीभिरभि रातिषाचो भगः पुरन्धिर्जिन्वतु पर राये|	sweet with the plants to gods who seek oblations may liberal bhaga speed us on to riches.
नु नो रयिं रथ्यं चर्षणिप्रां पुरुवीरं मह रतस्य गोपाम|	give riches borne on cars with many heroes contenting men the guard of mighty order.
कषयं दाताजरं येन जनान सप्र्धो अदेवीरभि चक्रमाम विश आदेवीरभ्यश्नवाम|	give us a lasting home that we may battle with godless bands of men who fight against us and meet with tribes to whom the gods are gracious.
यो रयिवो रयिन्तमो यो दयुम्नैर्द्युम्नवत्तमः|	that which is wealthiest wealthy god in splendoursmost illustrious.
सोमः सुतः स इन्द्र तेअस्ति सवधापते मदः|	soma is pressed thy gladdening draught indra libations lord is this.
यः शग्मस्तुविशग्म ते रायो दामा मतीनाम|	effectual most effectual one thine as bestowing wealth of hymns.
सोमः सुतः|	soma is pressed thy gladdening draught indra libations lord is this.
येन वर्द्धो न शवसा तुरो न सवाभिरूतिभिः|	wherewith thou art increased in strength and conquerest with thy proper aids.
सोमः सुतः|	soma is pressed thy gladdening draught indra libations lord is this.
तयमु वो अप्रहणं गर्णीषे शवसस पतिम|	him for your sake i glorify as lord of strength who wrongeth none.
इन्द्रं विश्वासाहं नरं मंहिष्ठं विश्वचर्षणिम|	the hero indra conquering all most bounteous god of all the tribes.
यं वर्धयन्तीद गिरः पतिं तुरस्य राधसः|	those goddesses both heaven and earth revere the power and might of him.
तमिन्न्वस्य रोदसी देवी शुष्मं सपर्यतः|	him whom our songs increase in strength the lord of bounty swift to come.
तद व उक्थस्य बर्हणेन्द्रायोपस्त्र्णीषणि|	to seat your indra i will spread abroad with power this song of praise.
विपो न यस्योतयो वि यद रोहन्ति सक्षितः|	the saving succours that abide in him like songs extend and grow.
अविदद दक्षं मित्रो नवीयान पपानो देवेभ्यो वस्यो अचैत|	a recent friend he found the skilful priest he drank and showed forth treasure from the gods.
ससवान सतौलाभिर्धौतरीभिरुरुष्या पायुरभवत सखिभ्यः|	he conquered borne by strong allshaking mares and was with farspread power his friends protector.
रतस्य पथि वेधा अपायि शरिये मनांसि देवासो अक्रन|	in course of law the sapient juice was quaffed the deities to glory turned their mind.
दधानो नाम महो वचोभिर्वपुर्द्र्शये वेन्यो वयावः|	winning through hymns a lofty title he the lovely made his beauteous form apparent.
दयुमत्तमं दक्षं धेह्यस्मे सेधा जनानां पूर्वीररातीः|	bestow on us the most illustrious strength ward off mens manifold malignities.
वर्षीयो वयः कर्णुहि शचीभिर्धनस्य सातावस्मानविड्ढि|	give with thy might abundant vital force and aid us graciously in gaining riches.
इन्द्र तुभ्यमिन मघवन्नभूम वयं दात्रे हरिवो मा विवेनः|	we turn to thee as giver liberal indra lord of the bay steeds be not thou ungracious.
नकिरापिर्दद्र्शे मर्त्यत्रा किमङग रध्रचोदनन्त्वाहुः|	no friend among mankind have we to lookto why have men called thee him who spurs the niggard.
मा जस्वने वर्षभ नो ररीथा मा ते रेवतः सख्ये रिषाम|	give us not up strong hero to the hungry unharmed be we whom thou so rich befriendest.
पूर्वीष ट इन्द्र निष्षिधो जनेषु जह्यसुष्वीन पर वर्हाप्र्णतः|	full many a boon hast thou for men demolish those who present no gifts nor pour oblations.
उदभ्राणीव सतनयन्नियर्तीन्द्रो राधांस्यश्व्यानि गव्या|	as indra thundering impels the rainclouds so doth he send us store of kine and horses.
तवमसि परदिवः कारुधाया मा तवादामान आ दभन्मघोनः|	thou art of old the cherisher of singers let not the rich who bring no gifts deceive thee.
अध्वर्यो वीर पर महे सुतानामिन्द्राय भर स हयस्य राजा|	adbyaryu hero bring to mighty indrafor he is king thereofthe pressedout juices.
यः पूर्व्याभिरुत नूतनाभिर्गीर्भिर्वाव्र्धे गर्णतां रषीणाम|	to him exalted by the hymns and praises ancient and modern of the singing Ṛṣis.
अस्य मदे पुरु वर्पांसि विद्वानिन्द्रो वर्त्राण्यप्रती जघान|	in the wild joy of this hath indra knowing full many a form struck down resistless vṛtras.
तमु पर होषि मधुमन्तमस्मै सोमं वीराय शिप्रिणे पिबध्यै|	proclaim aloud to him the savoury soma so that the hero strong of jaw may drink it.
पाता सुतमिन्द्रो अस्तु सोमं हन्ता वर्त्रं वज्रेण मन्दसानः|	may indra drink this soma poured to please him and cheered therewith slay vṛtra with his thunder.
गन्ता यज्ञं परावतश्चिदछा वसुर्धीनामविता कारुधायाः|	come to our sacrifice even from a distance good lover of our songs the bards supporter.
इदं तयत पात्रमिन्द्रपानमिन्द्रस्य परियमम्र्तमपायि|	the cup whence indra drinks the draught is present the amṛta dear to indra hath been drunken.
मत्सद यथा सौमनसाय देवं वयस्मद दवेषो युयवद वयंहः|	that it may cheer the god to gracious favour and keep far from us hatred and affliction.
एना मन्दानो जहि शूर शत्रूञ जामिमजामिं मघवन्नमित्रान|	therewith enraptured hero slay our foemen the unfriendly maghavan be they kin or strangers.
अभिषेणानभ्यादेदिशानान पराच इन्द्र पर मर्णाजही च|	those who still aim their hostile darts to smite us turn them to flight o indra crush and kill them.
आसु षमा णो मघवन्निन्द्र पर्त्स्वस्मभ्यं महि वरिवः सुगं कः|	o indra maghavan in these our battles win easy paths for us and ample freedom.
अपां तोकस्य तनयस्य जेष इन्द्र सूरीन कर्णुहिस्मा नो अर्धम|	that we may gain waters and seed and offspring set thou our princes on thy side o indra.
आ तवा हरयो वर्षणो युजाना वर्षरथासो वर्षरश्मयोअत्याः|	let thy bay stallions harnessed bring thee hither steeds with strong chariot and strong reins to hold them.
अस्मत्राञ्चो वर्षणो वज्रवाहो वर्ष्णे मदाय सुयुजोवहन्तु|	strong horses speeding hither bearing thunder wellharnessed for the strong exciting potion.
आ ते वर्षन वर्षणो दरोणमस्थुर्घ्र्तप्रुषो नोर्मयो मदन्तः|	beside the vat strong god stand thy strong horses shining with holy oil like waves exulting.
इन्द्र पर तुभ्यं वर्षभिः सुतानां वर्ष्णे भरन्तिव्र्षभाय सोमम|	indra they bring to thee the strong and mighty soma of juices shed by mighty pressstones.
वर्षासि दिवो वर्षभः पर्थिव्या वर्षा सिन्धूनां वर्षभस्तियानाम|	thou art the bull of earth the bull of heaven bull of the rivers bull of standing waters.
वर्ष्णे त इन्दुर्व्र्षभ पीपाय सवादू रसो मधुपेयो वराय|	for thee the strong o bull hath indu swollen juice pleasant sweet to drink for thine election.
अयं देवः सहसा जायमान इन्द्रेण युजा पणिमस्तभायत|	this god with might when first he had his being with indra for ally held fast the paṇi.
अयं सवस्य पितुरायुधानीन्दुरमुष्णादशिवस्य मायाः|	this indu stole away the warlike weapons and foiled the arts of his malignant father.
अयमक्र्णोदुषसः सुपत्नीरयं सूर्ये अदधाज्ज्योतिरन्तः|	the dawns he wedded to a glorious consort and set within the sun the light that lights him.
अयं तरिधातु दिवि रोचनेषु तरितेषु विन्ददम्र्तं निगूळ्हम|	he found in heaven in the third lucid regions the threefold amṛta in its close concealment.
अयं दयावाप्र्थिवी वि षकभायदयं रथमयुनक सप्तरश्मिम|	he stayed and held the heaven and earth asunder the chariot with the sevenfold reins he harnessed.
अयं गोषु शच्या पक्वमन्तः सोमो दाधार दशयन्त्रमुत्सम|	this soma set with power within the milchkine a spring whose ripe contents ten fingers empty.
अपूर्व्या पुरुतमान्यस्मै महे वीराय तवसे तुराय|	i with my lips have fashioned for this hero words never matched most plentiful and auspicious.
विरप्शिने वज्रिणे शन्तमानि वचांस्यासा सथविराय तक्षम|	for him the ancient great strong energetic the very mighty wielder of the thunder.
स मातरा सूर्येणा कवीनामवासयद रुजदद्रिं गर्णानः|	amid the sages with the sun he brightened the parents glorified he burst the mountain.
सवाधीभिर्र्क्वभिर्वावशान उदुस्रियाणामस्र्जन निदानम|	and roaring with the holythoughted singers he loosed the bond that held the beams of morning.
स वह्निभिर्र्क्वभिर्गोषु शश्वन मितज्ञुभिः पुरुक्र्त्वा जिगाय|	famed for great deeds with priests who kneel and laud him he still hath conquered in the frays for cattle.
पुरः पुरोहा सखिभिः सखीयन दर्ळ्हा रुरोज कविभिः कविः सन|	and broken down the forts the fortdestroyer a friend with friends a sage among the sages.
स नीव्याभिर्जरितारमछा महो वाजेभिर्महद्भिश्च शुष्मैः|	come with thy girthed mares with abundant vigour and plenteous strength to him who sings thy praises.
पुरुवीराभिर्व्र्षभ कषितीनामा गिर्वणः सुविताय पर याहि|	come hither borne by mares with many heroes lover of song steer for the peoples welfare.
स सर्गेण शवसा तक्तो अत्यैरप इन्द्रो दक्षिणतस्तुराषाट|	indra with rush and might sped by his coursers hath swiftly won the waters from the southward.
इत्था सर्जाना अनपाव्र्दर्थं दिवेदिवे विविषुरप्रम्र्ष्यम|	thus set at liberty the rivers daily flow to their goal incessant and exhaustless.
विश्वेषां वः सतां जयेष्ठतमा गीर्भिर्मित्रावरुणावाव्र्धध्यै|	now mitravaruṇa shall be exalted high by your songs noblest of all existing.
सं या रश्मेव यमतुर्यमिष्ठा दवा जनानसमा बाहुभिः सवैः|	they who as twere with reins are best controllers unequalled with their arms to check the people.
इयं मद वां पर सत्र्णीते मनीषोप परिया नमसा बर्हिरछ|	to you two gods is this my thought extended turned to the sacred grass with loving homage.
यन्तं नो मित्रावरुणावध्र्ष्टं छर्दिर्यद वां वरूथ्यं सुदानू|	give us o mitravaruṇa a dwelling safe from attack which ye shall guard boongivers.
आ यातं मित्रावरुणा सुशस्त्युप परिया नमसा हूयमाना|	come hither mitravaruṇa invited with eulogies and loving adoration.
सं यावप्नः सथो अपसेव जनाञ्छ्रुधीयतश्चिद यतथो महित्वा|	ye who with your might as workcontrollers urge even men who quickly hear to labour.
अश्वा न या वाजिना पूतबन्धू रता यद गर्भमदितिर्भरध्यै|	whom of pure origin like two strong horses aditi bore as babes in proper season.
पर या महि महान्ता जायमाना घोरा मर्तायरिपवे नि दीधः|	whom mighty at your birth the mighty goddess brought forth as terrors to the mortal foeman.
विश्वे यद वां मंहना मन्दमानाः कषत्रं देवासो अदधुः सजोषाः|	as all the gods in their great joy and gladness gave you with one accord your high dominion.
परि यद भूथो रोदसी चिदुर्वी सन्ति सपशो अदब्धासो अमूराः|	as ye surround both worlds though wide and spacious your spies are ever true and never bewildered.
ता हि कषत्रं धारयेथे अनु दयून दरंहेथे सानुमुपमादिव दयोः|	so through the days maintaining princely power ye prop the height as twere from loftiest heaven.
दर्ळ्हो नक्षत्र उत विश्वदेवो भूमिमातान दयां धासिनायोः|	the star of all the gods established filleth the heaven and earth with food of man who liveth.
ता विग्रं धैथे जठरं पर्णध्या आ यत सद्म सभ्र्तयः पर्णन्ति|	take the strong drink to quaff till ye are sated when he and his attendants fill the chamber.
न मर्ष्यन्ते युवतयोअवाता वि यत पयो विश्वजिन्वा भरन्ते|	the young maids brook not that none seeks to win them when quickeners of all they scatter moisture.
ता जिह्वया सदमेदं सुमेधा आ यद वां सत्यो अरतिरते भूत|	so with your tongue come ever when your envoy faithful and very wise attends our worship.
तद वां महित्वं घर्तान्नावस्तु युवं दाशुषेवि चयिष्टमंहः|	nourished by holy oil he this ygur glory annihilate the sacrificers trouble.
पर यद वां मित्रावरुणा सपूर्धन परिया धाम युवधिता मिनन्ति|	when mitravaruṇa they strive against you and break tlie friendly laws ye have established.
न ये देवास ओहसा न मर्ता अयज्ञसाचो अप्यो नपुत्राः|	they neither gods nor men in estimation like apis sons have godless sacrifices.
वि यद वाचं कीस्तासो भरन्ते शंसन्ति के चिन निविदो मनानाः|	when singers in their song uplift their voices some chant the nivid texts with steady purpose.
आद वां बरवाम सत्यान्युक्था नकिर्देवेभिर्यतथो महित्वा|	then may we sing you lauds that shall be fruitful dp ye not rival all the gods in greatness.
अवोरित्था वां छर्दिषो अभिष्टौ युवोर्मित्रावरुणावस्क्र्धोयु|	o mitravaruṇa may your large bounty come to us hither near to this our dwelling.
अनु यद गाव सफुरान रजिप्यं धर्ष्णुं यद रणेव्र्षणं युनजन|	when the kine haste to us and when they harness the fleetfoot mettled stallion for the battle.
य एक इद धव्यश्चर्षणीनामिन्द्रं तं गीर्भिरभ्यर्च आभिः|	with these my hymns i glorify that indra who is alone to be invoked by mortals.
यः पत्यते वर्षभो वर्ष्ण्यावान सत्यः सत्वा पुरुमायः सहस्वान|	the lord the mighty one of manly vigour victorious hero true and full of wisdom.
तमु नः पूर्वे पितरो नवग्वाः सप्त विप्रासो अभि वाजयन्तः|	our sires of old navagvas sages seven while urging him to show his might extolled him.
नक्षद्दाभं ततुरिं पर्वतेष्ठामद्रोघवाचं मतिभिः शविष्ठम|	dwelling on heights swift smiting down opponents guileless in word and in his thoughts most mighty.
तमीमह इन्द्रमस्य रायः पुरुवीरस्य नर्वतः पुरुक्षोः|	we seek that indra to obtain his riches that bring much food and men and store of heroes.
यो अस्क्र्धोयुरजरः सवर्वान तमा भर हरिवो मादयध्यै|	bring us lord of bay steeds to make us joyful celestial wealth abundant undecaying.
तन नो वि वोचो यदि ते पुरा चिज्जरितार आनशुः सुम्नमिन्द्र|	tell thou us this if at thy hand aforetime the earlier singers have obtained good fortune.
कस्ते भागः किं वयो दुध्र खिद्वः पुरुहूत पुरूवसोअसुरघ्नः|	what is thy share and portion strong subduer asuraslayer rich invoked of many.
तं पर्छन्ती वज्रहस्तं रथेष्ठामिन्द्रं वेपी वक्वरीयस्य नू गीः|	he who for carborne indra armed with thunder hath a hymn craving deeplypiercing fluent.
तुविग्राभं तुविकूर्मिं रभोदां गातुमिषे नक्षते तुम्रमछ|	who sends a song effectual firmlygrasping and strengthbestowing he comes near the mighty.
अया ह तयं मायया वाव्र्धानं मनोजुवा सवतवः पर्वतेन|	strong of thyself thou by this art hast shattered with thoughtswift parvata him who waxed against thee.
अच्युता चिद वीळिता सवोजो रुजो वि दर्ळ्हा धर्षता विरप्शिन|	and mightiest roaring boldly rent in pieces things that were firmly fixed and never shaken.
तं वो धिया नव्यस्या शविष्ठं परत्नं परत्नवत परितंसयध्यै|	him will we fit for you with new devotion the strongest ancient one in ancient manner.
स नो वक्षदनिमानः सुवह्मेन्द्रो विश्वान्यतिदुर्गहाणि|	so may that indra boundless faithful leader conduct us oer all places hard to traverse.
आ जनाय दरुह्वणे पार्थिवानि दिव्यानि दीपयोअन्तरिक्षा|	thou for the people who oppress hast kindled the earthly firmament and that of heaven.
तपा वर्षन विश्वतः शोचिषा तान बरह्मद्विषे शोचय कषामपश्च|	with heat o bull on every side consume them heat earth and flood for him who hates devotion.
भुवो जनस्य दिव्यस्य राजा पार्थिवस्य जगतस्त्वेषसन्द्र्क|	of all the heavenly folk of earthly creatures thou art the king o god of splendid aspect.
धिष्व वज्रं दक्षिण इन्द्र हस्ते विश्वा अजुर्य दयसे वि मायाः|	in thy right hand o indra grasp die thunder eternal thou destroyest all enchantments.
आ संयतमिन्द्र णः सवस्तिं शत्रुतूर्याय बर्हतीमम्र्ध्राम|	give us confirmed prosperity o indra vast and exhaustless for the foes subduing.
यया दासान्यार्याणि वर्त्रा करो वज्रिन सुतुका नाहुषाणि|	strengthen therewith the Āryas hate and dāsas and let the arms of nahusas be mighty.
स नो नियुद्भिः पुरुहूत वेधो विश्ववाराभिरा गहि परयज्यो|	come with thy team which brings all blessings hither disposer muchinvoked exceeding holy.
न या अदेवो वरते न देव आभिर्याहि तूयमा मद्र्यद्रिक|	thou whom no fiend no god can stay or hinder come swittly with these steeds in my direction.
भूय इद वाव्र्धे वीर्यायनेको अजुर्यो दयते वसूनि|	indra hath waxed yet more for hero prowess alone eternal he bestoweth treasures.
पर रिरिचे दिव इन्द्रः पर्थिव्या अर्धमिदस्य परति रोदसी उभे|	indra transcendeth both the worlds in greatness one half of him equalleth earth and heaven.
अधा मन्ये बर्हदसुर्यमस्य यानि दाधार नकिरा मिनाति|	yea mighty i esteem his godlike nature none hindereth what he hath once determined.
दिवेदिवे सूर्यो दर्शतो भूद वि सद्मान्युर्विया सुक्रतुर्धात|	near and afar he spread and set the regions and every day the sun became apparent.
अद्या चिन नू चित तदपो नदीनां यदाभ्यो अरदो गातुमिन्द्र|	een now endures thine exploit of the rivers when indra for their floods thou clavest passage.
नि पर्वता अद्मसदो न सेदुस्त्वया दर्ळ्हानि सुक्रतो रजांसि|	like men who sit at meat the mountains settled by thee most wise the regions were made steadfast.
सत्यमित तन न तवावानन्यो अस्तीन्द्र देवो न मर्त्यो जयायान|	this is the truth none else is like thee indra no god superior to thee no mortal.
अहन्नहिं परिशयानमर्णोअवास्र्जो अपो अछा समुद्रम|	thou slewest ahi who besieged the waters and lettest loose the streams to hurry seaward.
तवमपो वि दुरो विषूचीरिन्द्र दर्ळ्हमरुजः पर्वतस्य|	indra thou breakest up the floods and portals on all sides and the firmness of the mountain.
राजाभवो जगतश्चर्षणीनां साकं सूर्यं जनयन दयामुषासम|	thou art the king of men of all that liveth engendering at once sun heaven and morning.
अहश्च कर्ष्णमहरर्जुनं च वि वर्तेते रजसी वेद्याभिः|	one half of day is dark and bright the other both atmospheres move on by sage devices.
वैश्वानरो जायमानो न राजावातिरज्ज्योतिषाग्निस्तमांसि|	agni vaiśvānara when born as sovran hath with his lustre overcome the darkness.
नाहं तन्तुं न वि जानाम्योतुं न यं वयन्ति समरेऽतमानाः|	i know not either warp or woof i know not the web they weave when moving to the contest.
कस्य सवित पुत्र इह वक्त्वानि परो वदात्यवरेण पित्रा|	whose son shall here speak words that must be spoken without assistance from the father near him.
स इत तन्तुं स वि जानात्योतुं स वक्त्वान्य रतुथा वदाति|	for both the warp and woof he understandeth and in due time shall speak what should be spoken.
य ईं चिकेतदम्र्तस्य गोपा अवश्चरन परो अन्येन पश्यन|	who knoweth as the immortal worlds protector descending seeing with no aid from other.
अयं होता परथमः पश्यतेममिदं जयोतिरम्र्तं मर्त्येषु|	he is the priest the first of all behold him mid mortal men he is the light immortal.
अयं स जज्ञे धरुव आ निषत्तोअमर्त्यस्तन्वा वर्धमानः|	here was he born firmseated in his station immortal ever waxing in his body.
धरुवं जयोतिर्निहितं दर्शये कं मनो जविष्ठं पतयत्स्वन्तः|	a firm light hath been set for men to look on among all things that fly the mind is swiftest.
विश्वे देवाः समनसः सकेता एकं करतुमभिवि यन्ति साधु|	all gods of one accord with one intention move unobstructed to a single purpose.
वि मे कर्णा पतयतो वि चक्षुर्वीदं जयोतिर्ह्र्दय आहितं यत|	mine ears unclose to hear mine eye to see him the light that harbours in my spirit broadens.
वि मे मनश्चरति दूराधीः किं सविद वक्ष्यामिकिमु नू मनिष्ये|	far roams my mind whose thoughts are in the distance what shall i speak what shall i now imagine.
विश्वे देवा अनमस्यन भियानास्त्वामग्ने तमसि तस्थिवांसम|	all the gods bowed them down in fear before thee agni when thou wast dwelling in the darkness.
वैश्वानरोअवतूतये नोअमर्त्योअवतूतये नः|	vaiśvānara be gracious to assist us may the immortal favour us and help us.
सतुषे नरा दिवो अस्य परसन्ताश्विना हुवे जरमाणो अर्कैः|	i laud the heroes twain this heavens controllers singing with songs of praise i call the aśvins.
या सद्य उस्रा वयुषि जमो अन्तान युयूषतः पर्युरूवरांसि|	fain in a moment when the morns are breaking to part the earths ends and the spacious regions.
ता यज्ञमा शुचिभिश्चक्रमाणा रथस्य भानुं रुरुचूरजोभिः|	moving to sacrifice through realms of lustre they light the radiance of the car that bears them.
पुरू वरांस्यमिता मिमानापो धन्वान्यति याथो अज्रान|	traversing many wide unmeasured spaces over the wastes ye pass and fields and waters.
ता ह तयद वर्तिर्यदरध्रमुग्रेत्था धिय ऊहथुः शश्वदश्वैः|	ye to that bounteous path of yours ye mighty have ever borne away our thoughts with horses.
मनोजवेभिरिषिरैः शयध्यै परि वयथिर्दाशुषो मर्त्यस्य|	mindswift and full of vigour that the trouble of man who offers gifts might cease and slumber.
ता नव्यसो जरमाणस्य मन्मोप भूषतो युयुजानसप्ती|	so ye when ye have yoked your chariothorses come to the hymn of the most recent singer.
शुभं पर्क्षमिषमूर्जं वहन्ता होता यक्षत परत्नो अध्रुग युवाना|	our true and ancient herald priest shall bring you the youthful bearing splendour food and vigour.
ता वल्गू दस्रा पुरुशाकतमा परत्ना नव्यसा वचसा विवासे|	with newest hymn i call those wonderworkers ancient and brilliant and exceeding mighty.
या शंसते सतुवते शम्भविष्ठा बभूवतुर्ग्र्णते चित्रराती|	bringers of bliss to him who lauds and praises bestowing varied bounties on the singer.
ता भुज्युं विभिरद्भ्यः समुद्रात तुग्रस्य सूनुमूहथूरजोभिः|	so ye with birds out of the sea and waters bore bhujyu son of tugra through the regions.
अरेणुभिर्योजनेभिर्भुजन्ता पतत्रिभिरर्णसोनिरुपस्थात|	speeding with winged steeds through dustless spaces out of the bosom of the flood they bore him.
वि जयुषा रथ्या यातमद्रिं शरुतं हवं वर्षणा वध्रिमत्याः|	victors carborne ye rent the rock asunder bulls heard the calling of the eunuchs consort.
दशस्यन्ता शयवे पिप्यथुर्गामिति चयवाना सुमतिं भुरण्यू|	bounteous ye filled the cow with milk for Śayu thus swift and zealous ones ye showed your favour.
यद रोदसी परदिवो अस्ति भूमा हेळो देवानामुत मर्त्यत्रा|	whateer from olden time heaven earth existeth great object of the wrath of gods and mortals.
तदादित्या वसवो रुद्रियासो रक्षोयुजे तपुरघं दधात|	make that Ādityas vasus sons of rudra an evil brand to one allied with demons.
य ईं राजानाव रतुथा विदधद रजसो मित्रो वरुणश्चिकेतत|	may he who knows as varuṇa and mitra airs realm appointing both the kings in season.
गम्भीराय रक्षसे हेतिमस्य दरोघाय चिद वचस आनवाय|	against the secret fiend cast forth his weapon against the lying words that strangers utter.
अन्तरैश्चक्रैस्तनयाय वर्तिर्द्युमता यातं नर्वता रथेन|	come to our home with friendly wheels for offipring come on your radiant chariot rich in heroes.
सनुत्येन तयजसा मर्त्यस्य वनुष्यतामपि शीर्षावव्र्क्तम|	strike off ye twain the heads of our assailants who with mans treacherous attack approach us.
आ परमाभिरुत मध्यमाभिर्नियुद्भिर्यातमवमाभिरर्वाक|	come hitherward to us with teams of horses the highest and the midmost and the lowest.
दर्ळ्हस्य चिद गोमतो वि वरजस्य दुरो वर्तं गर्णते चित्रराती|	bountiful lords throw open to the singer doors een of the firmclosed stall of cattle.
उदु तयच्चक्षुर्महि मित्रयोरानेति परियं वरुणयोरदब्धम|	that mighty eye of varuṇa and mitra infallible and dear is moving upward.
रतस्य शुचि दर्शतमनीकं रुक्मो न दिव उदिताव्यद्यौत|	the pure and lovely face of holy order hath shone like gold of heaven in its arising.
वेद यस्त्रीणि विदथान्येषां देवानां जन्म सनुतरा च विप्रः|	the sage who knows these gods three ranks and orders and all their generations near and distant.
रजु मर्तेषु वर्जिना च पश्यन्नभि चष्टे सूरो अर्य एवान|	beholding good and evil acts of mortals sūra marks well the doing of the pious.
सतुष उ वो मह रतस्य गोपानदितिं मित्रं वरुणं सुजातान|	i praise you guards of mighty law eternal aditi mitra varuṇa the noble.
अर्यमणं भगमदब्धधीतीनछा वोचे सधन्यः पावकान|	aryaman bhaga all whose thoughts are faithful hither i call the bright who share in common.
रिशादसः सत्पतीन्रदब्धान महो राज्ञः सुवसनस्य दातॄन|	lords of the brave infallible foedestroyers great kings bestowers of fair homes to dwell in.
यूनः सुक्षत्रान कषयतो दिवो नॄनादित्यान याम्यदितिं दुवोयु|	young heroes ruling heaven with strong dominion Ādityas aditi i seek with worship.
दयौष पितः पर्थिवि मातरध्रुगग्ने भरातर्वसवो मर्ळता नः|	o heaven our father earth our guileless mother o brother agni and ye vasus bless us.
विश्व आदित्या अदिते सजोषा अस्मभ्यं शर्म बहुलं वि यन्त|	grant us o aditi and ye Ādityas all of one mind your manifold protection.
मा नो वर्काय वर्क्ये समस्मा अघायते रीरधता यजत्राः|	give us not up to any evil creature as spoil to wolf or shewolf o ye holy.
यूयं हि षठा रथ्यो नस्तनूनां यूयं दक्षस्य वचसो बभूव|	for ye are they who guide aright our bodies ye are the rulers of our speech and vigour.
मा व एनो अन्यक्र्तं भुजेम मा तत कर्म वसवो यच्चयध्वे|	let us not suffer for the sin of others nor do the deed which ye o vasus punish.
विश्वस्य हि कषयथ विश्वदेवाः सवयं रिपुस्तन्वं रीरिषीष्ट|	ye universal gods are allcontrollers may he do harm unto himself who hates me.
नम इदुग्रं नम आ विवासे नमो दाधार पर्थिवीमुत दयाम|	mighty is homage i adopt and use it homage hath held in place the earth and heaven.
नमो देवेभ्यो नम ईश एषां कर्तं चिदेनो नमसाविवासे|	homage to gods homage commands and rules them i banish even committed sin by homage.
रतस्य वो रथ्यः पूतदक्षान रतस्य पस्त्यसदो अदब्धान|	you furtherers of law pure in your spirit infallible dwellers in the home of order.
ताना नमोभिरुरुचक्षसो नॄन विश्वान व आ नमे महो यजत्राः|	to you all heroes mighty and farseeing i bow me down o holy ones with homage.
ते हि शरेष्ठवर्चसस्त उ नस्तिरो विश्वानि दुरिता नयन्ति|	for these are they who shine with noblest splendour through all our troubles these conduct us safely.
सुक्षत्रासो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निरतधीतयो वक्मराजसत्याः|	varuṇa mitra agni mighty rulers trueminded faithful to the hymns controllers.
ते न इन्द्रः पर्थिवी कषाम वर्धन पूषा भगो अदितिः पञ्च जनाः|	may they earth aditi indra bhaga pūṣan increase our laud increase the fivefold people.
सुशर्माणः सववसः सुनीथा भवन्तु नःसुत्रात्रासः सुगोपाः|	giving good help good refuge goodly guidance be they our good deliverers good protectors.
नू सद्मानं दिव्यं नंशि देवा भारद्वाजः सुमतिं याति होता|	come now o gods to your celestial station the bharadvājas priest entreats your favour.
आसानेभिर्यजमानो मियेधैर्देवानां जन्म वसूयुर्ववन्द|	he sacrificing fain for wealth hath honoured the gods vath those who sit and share oblations.
अप तयं वर्जिनं रिपुं सतेनमग्ने दुराध्यम|	agni drive thou the wicked foe the evilhearted thief away.
दविष्ठमस्य सत्पते कर्धी सुगम|	far far lord of the brave i and give us easy paths.
गरावाणः सोम नो हि कं सखित्वनाय वावशुः|	soma these pressingstones have called aloud to win thee for our friend.
जही नयत्रिणं पणिं वर्को हि षः|	destroy the greedy paṇi for a wolf is he.
यूयं हि षठा सुदानव इन्द्रज्येष्ठा अभिद्यवः|	ye o most bountiful are they who led by indra seek the sky.
कर्ता नो अध्वन्ना सुगं गोपा अमा|	give us good paths for travel guard us ivell at home.
अपि पन्थामगन्महि सवस्तिगामनेहसम|	now have we entered on the road that leads to bliss without a foe.
येन विश्वाः परिद्विषो वर्णक्ति विन्दते वसु|	the road whereon a man escapes all enemies and gathers wealth.
शरुधी न इन्द्र हवयामसि तवा महो वाजस्य सातौ वाव्र्षाणाः|	o indra hear us raining down the soma we call on thee to win us mighty valour.
सं यद विशोअयन्त शूरसाता उग्रं नोअवः पार्ये अहन दाः|	give us strong succour on the day of trial when the tribes gather on the field of battle.
तवां वाजी हवते वाजिनेयो महो वाजस्य गध्यस्य सातौ|	the warrior son of warrior sire invokes thee to gain great strength that may be won as booty.
तवां वर्त्रेष्विन्द्र सत्पतिं तरुत्रं तवां चष्टे मुष्टिहा गोषु युध्यन|	to thee the brave mans lord the fiends subduer he looks when fighting hand to hand for cattle.
तवं कविं चोदयोअर्कसातौ तवं कुत्साय शुष्णं दाशुषे वर्क|	thou didst impel the sage to win the daylight didst ruin Śuṣṇa for the pious kutsa.
तवं शिरो अमर्मणः पराहन्नतिथिग्वाय शंस्यं करिष्यन|	the invulnerable demons head thou clavest when thou wouldst win the praise of atithigva.
तवं रथं पर भरो योधं रष्वमावो युध्यन्तं वर्षभं दशद्युम|	the lofty battlecar thou broughtest forward thou holpest dasadyu the strong when fighting.
तवं तुग्रं वेतसवे सचाहन तवं तुजिं गर्णन्तमिन्द्र तूतोः|	along with vetasu thou slewest tugra and madest tuji strong who praised thee indra.
तवं तदुक्थमिन्द्र बर्हणा कः पर यच्छता सहस्राशूर दर्षि|	thou madest good the laud what time thou rentest a hundred thousand fighting foes o hero.
अव गिरेर्दासं शम्बरं हन परावो दिवोदासं चित्राभिरूती|	slewest the dāsa Śambara of the mountain and with strange aids didst succour divodāsa.
तवं शरद्धाभिर्मन्दसानः सोमैर्दभीतये चुमुरिमिन्द्रसिष्वप|	made glad with somadraughts and faith thou sentest cumuri to his sleep to please dabhīti.
तवं रजिं पिठीनसे दशस्यन षष्टिं सहस्राशच्या सचाहन|	thou kindly giving raji to pithinas slewest with might at once the sixty thousand.
अहं चन तत सूरिभिरानश्यां तव जयाय इन्द्र सुम्नमोजः|	may i too with the liberal chiefs o indra acquire thy blin supreme and domination.
तवया यत सतवन्ते सधवीर वीरास्त्रिवरूथेन नहुषा शविष्ठ|	when mightiest herogirt nahuṣa heroes boast them in thee the triplystrong defender.
वयं ते अस्यामिन्द्र दयुम्नहूतौ सखायः सयाम महिन परेष्ठाः|	so may we he thy friends thy best beloved o indra at this holy invocation.
परातर्दनिः कषत्रश्रीरस्तु शरेष्ठो घने वर्त्राणां सनये धनानाम|	best be pratardani illustrious ruler in slaying foemen and in gaining riches.
य ओजिष्ठ इन्द्र तं सु नो दा मदो वर्षन सवभिष्टिर्दास्वान|	give us the rapture that is mightiest indra prompt to bestow and swift to aid o hero.
सौवश्व्यं यो वनवत सवश्वो वर्त्रा समत्सु सासहदमित्रान|	that wins with brave steeds where brave steeds encounter and quells the vṛtras and the foes in battle.
तवां हीन्द्रावसे विवाचो हवन्ते चर्षणयः शूरसातौ|	for with loud voice the tribes invoke thee indra to aid them in the battlefield of heroes.
तवं विप्रेभिर्वि पणीन्रशायस्त्वोत इत सनिता वाजमर्वा|	thou with the singers hast pierced through the paṇis the charger whom thou aidest wins the booty.
तवं तानिन्द्रोभयानमित्रान दासा वर्त्राण्यार्या च शूर|	both races indra of opposing foemen o hero both the Ārya and the dāsa.
वधीर्वनेव सुधितेभिरत्कैरा पर्त्सु दर्षि नर्णां नर्तम|	hast thou struck down like woods with wellshot lightnings thou rentest them in fight most manly chieftain.
स तवं न इन्द्राकवाभिरूती सखा विश्वायुरविता वर्धे भूः|	indra befriend us with no scanty succour prosper and aid us loved of all that liveth.
सवर्षाता यद धवयामसि तवा युध्यन्तो नेमधिताप्र्त्सु शूर|	when fighting for the sunlight we invoke thee o hero in the fray in wars division.
नूनं न इन्द्रापराय च सया भवा मर्ळीक उत नो अभिष्टौ|	be ours o indra now and for the future be graciously inclined and near to help us.
इत्था गर्णन्तो महिनस्य शर्मन दिवि षयाम पार्ये गोषतमाः|	thus may we singing sheltered by the mighty win many cattle on the day of trial.
किमस्य मदे किं वस्य पीताविन्द्रः किमस्य सख्ये चकार|	what deed hath indra done in the wild transport in quaffing or in friendship with the soma.
रणा वा ये निषदि किं ते अस्य पुर विविद्रे किमु नूतनासः|	what joys have men of ancient times or recent obtained within the chamber of libation.
सदस्य मदे सद वस्य पितविन्द्रः सदस्य सख्ये चकार|	in its wild joy indra hath proved him faithful faithful in quaffing faithful in its friendship.
रणा वा ये निषदि सत ते अस्य पुर विविद्रे सदु नूतनासः|	his truth is the delight that in this chamber the men of old and recent times have tasted.
नहि नु ते महिमनः समस्य न मघवन मघवत्त्वस्य विद्म|	all thy vast power o maghavan we know not know not the riches of thy full abundance.
न राधसोराधसो नूतनस्येन्द्र नकिर्दद्र्श इन्द्रियं ते|	no one hath seen that might of thine productive of bounty every day renewed o indra.
एतत तयत त इन्द्रियमचेति येनावधीर्वरशिखस्य शेषः|	this one great power of thine our eyes have witnessed wherewith thou slewest varasikhas children.
वज्रस्य यत ते निहतस्य शुष्मात सवनाच्चिदिन्द्र परमोददार|	when by the force of thy descending thunder at the mere solund their boldest was demolished.
वधीदिन्द्रो वरशिखस्य शेषोअभ्यावर्तिने चायमानाय शिक्षन|	in aid of abhyavartin cayamana indra destroyed the seed of varasikha.
वर्चीवतो यद धरियूपीयायां हन पूर्वे अर्धे भियसापरो दर्त|	at hariyupiya he smote the vanguard of the vrcivans and the rear fled frighted.
तरिंशच्छतं वर्मिण इन्द्र साकं यव्यावत्यां पुरुहूत शरवस्या|	three thousand mailed in quest of fame together on the yavyavati o muchsought indra.
वर्चीवन्तः शरवे पत्यमानाः पात्रा भिन्दानन्यर्थान्यायन|	vrcivans sons falling before the arrow like bursting vessels went to their destruction.
यस्य गावावरुषा सूयवस्यू अन्तरू षु चरतो रेरिहाणा|	he whose two red steers seeking goodly pasture plying their tongues move on twixt earth and heaven.
स सर्ञ्जयाय तुर्वशं परादाद वर्चीवतो दैववातायशिक्षन|	gave turvaśa to sṛñjaya and to aid him gave the vrcivans up to daivavata.
दवयानग्ने रथिनो विंशतिं गा वधूमतो मघवा मह्यं सम्राट|	two wagonteams with damsels twenty oxen o agni abhydvartin cayamdna.
अभ्यावर्ती चायमानो ददाति दूणाशेयं दक्षिणा पार्थवानाम|	the liberal sovran giveth me this guerdon of prthus seed is hard to win from others.
यज्ञायज्ञा वो अग्नये गिरागिरा च दक्षसे|	sing to your agni with each song at every sacrifice for strength.
परपर वयमम्र्तं जातवेदसं परियं मित्रं न शंसिषम|	come let us praise the wise and everlasting god even as a wellbeloved friend.
ऊर्जो नपातं स हिनायमस्मयुर्दाशेम हव्यदातये|	the son of strength for is he not our gracious lord let us serve him who bears our gifts.
भुवद वाजेष्वविता भुवद वर्ध उत तराता तनूनाम|	in battle may he be our help and strengthener yea be the saviour of our lives.
वर्षा हयग्ने अजरो महान विभास्यर्चिषा|	agni thou beamest forth with light great hero never changed by time.
अजस्रेण शोचिषा शोशुचच्छुचे सुदीतिभिः सु दीदिहि|	shining pure agni with a light that never fades beam with thy fair beams brilliantly.
महो देवान यजसि यक्ष्यानुषक तव करत्वोत दंसना|	thou worshippest great gods bring them without delay by wisdom and thy wondrous power.
अर्वाचः सीं कर्णुह्यग्नेअवसे रास्व वाजोत वंस्व|	o agni make them turn hither to succour us give strength and win it for thyself.
यमापो अद्रयो वना गर्भं रतस्य पिप्रति|	he whom floods stones and trees support the offspring of eternal law.
सहसा यो मथितो जायते नर्भिः पर्थिव्या अधि सानवि|	he who when rubbed with force is brought to life by men upon the lofty height of earth.
आ यः पप्रौ भानुना रोदसी उभे धूमेन धावते दिवि|	he who hath filled both worlds fult with his brilliant shine who hastens with his smoke to heaven.
तिरस्तमो दद्र्श ऊर्म्यास्वा शयावास्वरुषो वर्षा शयावा अरुषो वर्षा|	he made himself apparent through the gloom by night the red bull in the darksome nights the red bull in the darksome nights.
बर्हद्भिरग्ने अर्चिभिः शुक्रेण देव शोचिषा|	o agni with thy lofty beams with thy pure brilliancy o god.
भरद्वाजे समिधानो यविष्ठ्य रेवन नः शुक्र दीदिहि दयुमत पावक दीदिहि|	kindled most youthful one by bharadvājas hand shine on us o pure god with wealth shine purifier splendidly.
विश्वासां गर्हपतिर्विशामसि तवमग्ने मानुषीणाम|	thou art the lord of house and home of all the tribes o agni of all tribes of men.
शतं पूर्भिर्यविष्ठ पाह्यंहसः समेद्धारं शतं हिमा सतोत्र्भ्यो ये च ददति|	guard with a hundred forts thy kindler from distress through hundred winters youngest god and those who make thy singers rich.
तवं नश्चित्र ऊत्या वसो राधांसि चोदय|	wonderful with thy favouring help send us thy bounties gracious lord.
अस्य रायस्त्वमग्ने रथीरसि विदा गाधं तुचे तु नः|	thou art the charioteer agni of earthly wealth find rest and safety for our seed.
पर्षि तोकं तनयं पर्त्र्भिष टवमदब्धैरप्रयुत्वभिः|	with guards unfailing never negligent speed thou our children and our progeny.
अग्ने हेळांसि दैव्या युयोधि नोअदेवानि हवरांसि च|	keep far from us o agni all celestial wrath and wickedness of godless men.
आ सखायः सबर्दुघां धेनुमजध्वमुप नव्यसा वचः|	hither o friends with newest song drive her who freely pours her milk.
सर्जध्वमनपस्फुराम|	loose her who never turns away.
या शर्धाय मारुताय सवभानवे शरवोअम्र्त्यु धुक्षत|	who for the host of maruts bright with native sheen hath shed immortal fame like milk.
या मर्ळीके मरुतां तुराणां या सुम्नैरेवयावरी|	whom the impetuous maruts look upon with love who moves in splendour on their ways.
भरद्वाजायाव धुक्षत दविता|	for bharadvāja she poured down in days of old.
धेनुं च विश्वदोहसमिषं च विश्वभोजसम|	the milchcow yielding milk for all and food that gives all nourishment.
तं व इन्द्रं न सुक्रतुं वरुणमिव मायिनम|	your friend like indra passing wise with magic power like varuṇa.
अर्यमणं न मन्द्रं सर्प्रभोजसं विष्णुं न सतुष आदिशे|	like aryaman joygiving bringing plenteous food like visnxu for my wish i praise.
तवेषं शर्धो न मारुतं तुविष्वण्यनर्वाणं पूषणं सं यथा शता|	bright as the host of maruts mighty in their roar may they bring pūṣan free from foes.
सं सहस्रा कारिषच्चर्षणिभ्य आनाविर्गूळ्हा वसू करत सुवेदा नो वसू करत|	may they bring hither hundreds thousands for our men may they bring hidden stores to light and make wealth easy to be found.
आ मा पूषन्नुप दरव शंसिषं नु ते अपिकर्ण आघ्र्णे|	haste to me pūṣan in thine car bright deity i fain would speak.
अघा अर्यो अरातयः|	most sinful is our foemans hate.
मा काकम्बीरमुद वर्हो वनस्पतिमशस्तीर्वि हि नीनशः|	tear not up by the roots the kakambira tree destroy thou all malignity.
मोत सूरो अह एवा चन गरीवा आदधते वेः|	let them not snare by day the neck of that celestial bird the sun.
दर्तेरिव तेअव्र्कमस्तु सख्यम|	uninjured let thy friendship be like the smooth surface of a skin.
अछिद्रस्य दधन्वतः सुपूर्णस्य दधन्वतः|	a flawless skin containing curds full to the mouth containing curds.
परो हि मर्त्यैरसि समो देवैरुत शरिया|	for thou art high above mankind in glory equal to the gods.
अभि खयः पूषन पर्तनासु नस्त्वमवा नूनं यथा पुरा|	therefore o pūṣan look upon us in the fight now help us as in days of old.
वामी वामस्य धूतयः परणीतिरस्तु सून्र्ता|	may the kind excellence of him the kind loud roarers be our guide.
देवस्य वामरुतो मर्त्यस्य वेजानस्य परयज्यवः|	be it the gods o maruts or a mortal mans who worships ye impetuous ones.
सद्यश्चिद यस्य चर्क्र्तिः परि दयां देवो नैति सूर्यः|	they whose high glory in a moment like the god the sun goes round the space of heaven.
तवेषं शवो दधिरे नाम यज्ञियं मरुतो वर्त्रहं शवो जयेष्ठं वर्त्रहं शवः|	the maruts have obtained bright strength a sacred name strength that destroys the vṛtras strength vṛtradestroying excellent.
सक्र्द ध दयौरजायत सक्र्द भूमिरजायत|	once only once the heaven was made once only once the earth was formed.
पर्श्न्या दुग्धं सक्र्त पयस्तदन्यो नानु जायते|	once only pṛśnis milk was shed no second after this is born.
मध्ये होता दुरोणे बर्हिषो राळ अग्निस्तोदस्य रोदसी यजध्यै|	king of trimmed grass herald within the dwelling may agni worship the impellers worldhalves.
अयं स सूनुः सहस रतावा दूरात सूर्यो न शोचिषा ततान|	he son of strength the holy from a distance hath spread himself abroad with light like sūrya.
आ यस्मिन तवे सवपाके यजत्र यक्षद राजन सर्वतातेव नुद्यौः|	in thee most wise shall dyaus for full perfection king holy one pronounce the call to worship.
तरिषधस्थस्ततरुषो न जंहो हव्या मघानि मानुषा यजध्यै|	found in three places like the speeders footstep come to present mens riches as oblations.
तेजिष्ठा यस्यारतिर्वनेराट तोदो अध्वन न वर्धसानो अद्यौत|	whose blaze most splendid sovran in the forest shines waxing on his way like the  impeller.
अद्रोघो न दरविता चेतति तमन्नमर्त्योअवर्त्र ओषधीषु|	he knows himself like as a guileless smelter not to be stayed among the plants immortal.
सास्माकेभिरेतरी न शूषैरग्नि षटवे दम आ जातवेदाः|	our friends extol him like a steed for vigour even agni in the dwelling jataveas.
दर्वन्नो वन्वन करत्वा नार्वोस्रः पितेव जारयायि यज्ञैः|	trcefed he fights with power as doth a champion like dawns sire to be praised with sacrifices.
अध समास्य पनयन्ति भासो वर्था यत तक्षदनुयाति पर्थ्वीम|	men wonder at his shining glows when paring the woods with case oer the broad earth he goeth.
सद्यो यः सयन्द्रो विषितो धवीयान रणो न तायुरति धन्वा राट|	and like a rushing flood loosed quickly burneth swift as a guilty thief oer desert places.
स तवं नो अर्वन निदाया विश्वेभिरग्ने अग्निभिरिधानः|	so mighty thou protectest us from slander o champion agni with all fires enkindled.
वेषि रायो वि यासि दुछुना मदेम शतहिमाः सुवीराः|	bring opulence and drive away affliction may brave sons gladden us through a hundred winters.
इमा उ तवा पुरुतमस्य कारोर्हव्यं वीर हव्या हवन्ते|	these the most constant singers invocations call thee who art to be invoked o hero.
धियो रथेष्ठामजरं नवीयो रयिर्विभूतिरीयते वचस्या|	hymns call anew the chariotborne eternal by eloquence men gain abundant riches.
तमु सतुष इन्द्रं यो विदानो गिर्वाहसं गीर्भीर्यज्ञव्र्द्धम|	i praise that indra known to all men honoured with songs extolled with hymns at sacrifices.
यस्य दिवमति मह्ना पर्थिव्याः पुरुमायस्य रिरिचेमहित्वम|	whose majesty rich in wondrous arts surpasseth the magnitude of earth and heaven in greatness.
स इत तमोअवयुनं ततन्वत सूर्येण वयुनवच्चकार|	he hath made pathways with the sun to aid him throughout the darkness that extended pathless.
कदा ते मर्ता अम्र्तस्य धामेयक्षन्तो न मिनन्ति सवधावः|	mortals who yearn to worship neer dishonour o mighty god thy law who art immortal.
यस्ता चकार स कुह सविदिन्द्रः कमा जनं चरति कासु विक्षु|	and he who did these things where is that indra among what tribes what people doth he visit.
कस्ते यज्ञो मनसे शं वराय को अर्क इन्द्रकतमः स होता|	what sacrifice contents thy mind  and wishes what priest among them all what hymn o indra.
इदा हि ते वेविषतः पुराजाः परत्नास आसुः पुरुक्र्त सखायः|	yea here were they who born of old have served thee thy friends of ancient time thou active worker.
ये मध्यमास उत नूतनास उतावमस्य पुरुहूत बोधि|	bethink thee now of these invoked of many the midmost and the recent and the youngest.
तं पर्छन्तोअवरासः पराणि परत्ना त इन्द्र शरुत्यानु येमुः|	inquiring after him thy later servants indra have gained thy former old traditions.
अर्चामसि वीर बरह्मवाहो यादेव विद्म तात तवा महान्तम|	hero to whom the prayer is brought we praise thee as great for that wherein we know thee mighty.
अभि तवा पाजो रक्षसो वि तस्थे महि जज्ञानमभि तत सु तिष्ठ|	the demons strength is gathered fast against thee great as that strength hath grown go forth to meet it.
तव परत्नेन युज्येन सख्या वज्रेण धर्ष्णो अपता नुदस्व|	with thine own ancient friend and companion the thunderbolt brave champion drive it backward.
स तु शरुधीन्द्र नूतनस्य बरह्मण्यतो वीर कारुधायः|	hear too the prayer of this thy present beadsman o indra hero cherishing the singer.
तवं हयापिः परदिवि पितॄणां शश्वद बभूथ सुहव एष्टौ|	for thou wast aye our fathers friend aforetime still swift to listen to their supplication.
परोतये वरुणं मित्रमिन्द्रं मरुतः कर्ष्वावसे नो अद्य|	bring to our help this day for our protection varuṇa mitra  indra and the maruts.
पर पूषणं विष्णुमग्निं पुरन्धिं सवितारमोषधीः पर्वतांश्च|	pūṣan and viṣṇu agni and purandhi savitar also and the plants and mountains.
इम उ तवा पुरुशाक परयज्यो जरितारो अभ्यर्चन्त्यर्कैः|	the singers here exalt with hymns and praises thee who art very mighty and most holy.
शरुधी हवमा हुवतो हुवानो न तवावानन्यो अम्र्त तवदस्ति|	hear when invoked the invokers invocation beside thee there is nonelike thee immortal.
नू म आ वाचमुप याहि विद्वान विश्वेभिः सूनो सहसो यजत्रैः|	now to my words come quickly thou who knowest o son of strength with all who claim our worship.
ये अग्निजिह्वा रतसाप आसुर्ये मनुं चक्रुरुपरं दसाय|	who visit sacred rites whose tongue is agni gods who made manu stronger than the dasyu.
स नो बोधि पुरेता सुगेषूत दुर्गेषु पथिक्र्द विदानः|	on good and evil ways be thou our leader thou who art known to all as pathpreparer.
ये अश्रमास उरवो वहिष्ठास्तेभिर्न इन्द्राभि वक्षि वाजम|	bring power to us o indra with thy horses steeds that are best to draw broadbacked unwearied.
इन्द्रं वो नरः सख्याय सेपुर्महो यन्तः सुमतये चकानाः|	your men have followed indra for his friendship and for his lovingkindness glorified him.
महो हि दाता वज्रहस्तो अस्ति महामु रण्वमवसे यजध्वम|	for he bestows great wealth the thunderwielder worship him great and kind to win his favour.
आ यस्मिन हस्ते नर्या मिमिक्षुरा रथे हिरण्यये रथेष्ठाः|	him to whose hand men closely cling and drivers stand on his golden chariot firmly stationed.
आ रश्मयो गभस्त्यो सथूरयोराध्वन्नश्वासो वर्षणो युजानाः|	with his firm arms he holds the reins his horses the stallions are yoked ready for the journey.
शरिये ते पादा दुव आ मिमिक्षुर्ध्र्ष्णुर्वज्री शवसा दक्षिणावान|	thy devotees embrace thy feet for glory bold thunderarmed rich through thy strength in guerdon.
वसानो अत्कं सुरभिं दर्शे कं सवर्ण नर्तविषिरो बभूथ|	robed in a garment fair as heaven to look on thou hast displayed thee like an active dancer.
स सोम आमिश्लतमः सुतो भूद यस्मिन पक्तिः पच्यते सन्तिधानाः|	that soma when effused hath best consistence for which the food is dressed and grain is mingled.
इन्द्रं नर सतुवन्तो बरह्मकारा उक्था शंसन्तो देववाततमाः|	by which the men who pray extolling indra chief favourites of gods recite their praises.
न ते अन्तः शवसो धाय्यस्य वि तु बाबधे रोदसी महित्वा|	no limit of thy might hath been appointed which by its greatness sundered earth and heaven.
आ ता सूरिः पर्णति तूतुजानो यूथेवाप्सु समीजमान ऊती|	these the prince filleth full with strong endeavour driving as twere with help his flocks to waters.
एवेदिन्द्रः सुहव रष्वो अस्तूती अनूती हिरिशिप्रः सत्वा|	so be the lofty indra prompt to listen helper unaided goldenvisored hero.
एवा हि जातो असमात्योजाः पुरू च वर्त्रा हनति नि दस्यून|	yea so may he shown forth in might unequalled smite down the many vṛtras and the dasyus.
उदु षय देवः सविता हिरण्यया बाहू अयंस्त सवनायसुक्रतुः|	full of effectual wisdom savitar the god hath stretched out golden arms that he may bring forth life.
घर्तेन पाणी अभि परुष्णुते मखो युवा सुदक्षो रजसो विधर्मणि|	young and most skilful while he holds the region up the warrior sprinkles fatness over both his hands.
देवस्य वयं सवितुः सवीमनि शरेष्ठे सयाम वसुनश्चदावने|	may we enjoy the noblest vivifying force of savitar the god that he may give us wealth.
यो विश्वस्य दविपदो यश्चतुष्पदो निवेशने परसवे चासि भूमनः|	for thou art mighty to produce and lull to rest the world of life that moves on two feet and on four.
अदब्धेभिः सवितः पायुभिष टवं शिवेभिरद्य परि पाहि नो गयम|	protect our habitation savitar this day with guardian aids around auspicious firm and true.
हिरण्यजिह्वः सुविताय नव्यसे रक्षा माकिर्नोघशंस ईशत|	god of the golden tongue keep us for newest bliss let not the evilwisher have us in his power.
उदु षय देवः सविता दमूना हिरण्यपाणिः परतिदोषमस्थात|	this savitar the god the goldenhanded friend of the home hath risen to meet the twilight.
अयोहनुर्यजतो मन्द्रजिह्व आ दाशुषे सुवति भूरिवामम|	with cheeks of brass with pleasant tongue the holy he sends the worshipper rich gifts in plenty.
उदू अयानुपवक्तेव बाहू हिरण्यया सविता सुप्रतीका|	like a director savitar hath extended his golden arms exceeding fair to look on.
दिवो रोहांस्यरुहत पर्थिव्या अरीरमत पतयत कच्चिदभ्वम|	he hath gone up the heights of earth and heaven and made each monster fall and cease from troubling.
वाममद्य सवितर्वाममु शवो दिवेदिवे वाममस्मभ्यं सावीः|	fair wealth o savitar today tomorrow fair wealth produce for us each day that passes.
वामस्य हि कषयस्य देव भूरेरया धिया वामभाजः सयाम|	may we through this our song be happy gainers god of a fair and spacious habitation.
इममू षु वो अतिथिमुषर्बुधं विश्वासां विशां पतिम्र्ञ्जसे गिरा|	with this my song i strive to reach this guest of yours who wakes at early morn the lord of all the tribes.
वेतीद दिवो जनुषा कच्चिदा शुचिर्ज्योक चिदत्ति गर्भो यदच्युतम|	each time he comes from heaven the pure one from of old from ancient days the child cats everlasting food.
मित्रं न यं सुधितं भर्गवो दधुर्वनस्पतावीड्यमूर्ध्वशोचिषम|	whom welldis sed the blirgus stablished as a rriend whom men must glorify highflaming in the wood.
स तवं सुप्रीतो वीतहव्ये अद्भुत परशस्तिभिर्महयसे दिवे दिवे|	as such most friendly thou art every day extolled in lauds by vitahavya o thou wondrous god.
स तवं दक्षस्याव्र्को वर्धो भूरर्यः परस्यान्तरस्य तरुषः|	be thou the foeless helper of the skilful man subduer of the enemy near or far away.
रायः सूनो सहसो मर्त्येष्वा छर्दिर्यछ वीतहव्याय सप्रथो भरद्वाजाय सप्रथः|	bestow a wealthy home on men o son of strength give vitahavya riches spreading far and wide give bharadvāja widespread wealth.
दयुतानं वो अतिथिं सवर्णरमग्निं होतारं मनुषः सवध्वरम|	him your refulgent guest agni who comes from heaven the herald of mankind wellskilled in sacred rites.
विप्रं न दयुक्षवचसं सुव्र्क्तिभिर्हव्यवाहमरतिं देवं रञ्जसे|	who like a holy singer utters heavenly words oblationbearer envoy god i seek with hymns.
पावकया यश्चितयन्त्या कर्पा कषामन रुरुच उषसो न भानुना|	who with his purifying eyeattracting form hath shone upon the earth as with the light of dawn.
तूर्वन न यामन्नेतशस्य नू रण आ यो घर्णे न तत्र्षाणो अजरः|	who speeding on as in the fight of etaia cometh untouched by age as one athirst in heat.
अग्निमअग्निं वः समिधा दुवस्यत परियमपरियं वो अतिथिं गर्णीषणि|	worship ye agni agni with your log of wood praise your beloved your beloved guest with songs.
उप वो गीर्भिरम्र्तं विवासत देवो देवेषु वनते हि वार्यं देवो देवेषु वनते हि नो दुवः|	invite ye the immortal hither with your hymns a god among the gods he loveth what is choice loveth our service god mid gods.
समिद्धमग्निं समिधा गिरा गर्णे शुचिं पावकं पुरो अध्वरे धरुवम|	agni inflamed with fuel in my song i sing pure cleanser steadlast set in tront at sacrifice.
विप्रं होतारं पुरुवारमद्रुहं कविं सुम्नैरीमहे जातवेदसम|	wise jātavedas we implore with prayers for bliss the priest the holy singer bounteous void of guile.
तवां दूतमग्ने अम्र्तं युगेयुगे हव्यवाहं दधिरे पायुमीड्यम|	men agni in each age have made thee deathiess one their envoy offeringbearer guard adorable.
देवासश्च मर्तासश्च जाग्र्विं विभुं विश्पतिं नमसा नि षेदिरे|	with reverence gods and mortals have established thee the everwatchful omnipresent household lord.
विभूषन्नग्न उभयाननु वरता दूतो देवानां रजसी समीयसे|	thou agni ordering the works and ways of both as envoy of the gods traversest both the worlds.
यत ते धीतिं सुमतिमाव्र्णीमहेअध समा नस्त्रिवरूथः शिवो भव|	when we lay claim to thy regard and gracious fare be thou to us a thriceprotecting friendly guard.
तं सुप्रतीकं सुद्र्शं सवञ्चमविद्वांसो विदुष्टरं सपेम|	him fair of face rapid and fair to look on him very wise may we who know not follow.
स यक्षद विश्वा वयुनानि विद्वान पर हव्यमग्निरम्र्तेषु वोचत|	let him who knows all rules invite for worship agru announce our offering to the immortals.
तमग्ने पास्युत तं पिपर्षि यस्त आनट कवये शूर धीतिम|	him agni thou deliverest and savest who brings him prayer to thee the wise o hero.
यज्ञस्य वा निशितिं वोदितिं वा तमित पर्णक्षि शवसोत राया|	the end of sacrifice or its inception yea thou endowest him with power and riches.
तवमग्ने वनुष्यतो नि पाहि तवमु नः सहसावन्नवद्यात|	guard us from him who would assail us agni preserve us o thou victor from dishonour.
सं तवा धवस्मन्वदभ्येतु पाथः सं रयि सप्र्हयाय्यःसहस्री|	here let the place of darkening come upon thee may wealth be ours desirable in thousands.
अग्निर्होता गर्हपतिः स राजा विश्वा वेद जनिमा जातवेदः|	agni the priest is king lord of the homestead he jatayedas knows all generations.
देवानामुत यो मर्त्यानां यजिष्ठः स पर यजतां रतावा|	most skilful worshipper mid gods and mortals may he begin the sacrifice the holy.
अग्ने यदद्य विशो अध्वरस्य होतः पावकशोचे वेष टवं हि यज्वा|	whateer today thou brightflamed priest enjoyest from the mans ritefor thou art sacrificer.
रता यजासि महिना वि यद भूर्हव्या वह यविष्ठ या ते अद्य|	worship for duly dost thou spread in greatness bear off thine ofrerings of today most youthful.
अभि परयांसि सुधितानि हि खयो नि तवा दधीत रोदसी यजध्यै|	look thou upon the viands duly laid for thee fain would he set thee here to worship heaven andearth.
अवा नो मघवन वाजसातावग्ने विश्वानि दुरिता तरेम ता तरेम तवावसा तरेम|	help us o liberal agni in the strife for spoil so that we may oercome all things that trouble us oercome oercome them with thy help.
अग्ने विश्वेभिः सवनीक देवैरूर्णावन्तं परथमः सीद योनिम|	together with all gods o fairfaced agni be seated first upon the woollined altar.
कुलायिनं घर्तवन्तं सवित्रे यज्ञं नय यजमानाय साधु|	nestlike bedewed with oil bear this our worship to savitar who sacrifices rightly.
इममु तयमथर्ववदग्निं मन्थन्ति वेधसः|	here the arranging priests as did atharvan rub this agni forth.
यमङकूयन्तमानयन्नमूरं शयाव्याभ्यः|	whom not bewildered as he moved in winding ways they brought from gloom.
जनिष्वा देववीतये सर्वताता सवस्तये|	for the gods banquet be thou born for full perfection and for weal.
आ देवान वक्ष्यम्र्तान रताव्र्धो यज्ञं देवेषु पिस्प्र्शः|	bring the immortal gods who strengthen holy law so let our sacrifice reach the gods.
वयमु तवा गर्हपते जनानामग्ने अकर्म समिधा बर्हन्तम|	o agni lord and master of mens homesteads with kindled fuel we have made thee mighty.
अस्थूरि नो गार्हपत्यानि सन्तु तिग्मेन नस्तेजसा सं शिशाधि|	let not our household gear be found defective sharpen us with thy penetrating splendour.
पर नु वोचा सुतेषु वां वीर्या यानि चक्रथुः|	i will declare while juices flow the manly deeds that ye have done.
हतासो वां पितरो देवशत्रव इन्द्राग्नी जीवथो युवम|	your fathers enemies of gods were smitten down and indraagni ye survive.
बळ इत्था महिमा वामिन्द्राग्नी पनिष्ठ आ|	thus indraagnip verily your greatness merits loftiest praise.
समानो वां जनिता भरातरा युवं यमाविहेहमातरा|	sprung from one common father brothers twins are ye your mother is in every place.
ओकिवांसा सुते सचानश्वा सप्ती इवादने|	these who delight in flowing juice like fellow horses at their food.
इन्द्रा नवग्नी अवसेह वज्रिणा वयं देवा हवामहे|	indra and agni gods armed with the thunderbolt we call this day to come with help.
य इन्द्राग्नी सुतेषु वां सतवत तेष्व रताव्र्धा|	indra and agni friends of law served with rich gifts your speech is kind.
जोषवाकं वदतः पज्रहोषिणा न देवा भसथश्चन|	to him who praises you while these libations flow that man o gods ye neer consume.
इन्द्राग्नी को अस्य वां देवौ मर्तश्चिकेतति|	what mortal understands o gods indra and agni this your way.
विषूचो अश्वान युयुजान ईयत एकः समान आ रथे|	one of you yoking steeds that move to every side advances in your common car.
इन्द्राग्नी अपादियं पूर्वागात पद्वतीभ्यः|	first indraagni hath this maid come footless unto those with feet.
हित्वी शिरो जिह्वया वावदच्चरत तरिंशत पदा नयक्रमीत|	stretching her head and speaking loudly with her tongue she hath gone downward thirty steps.
इन्द्राग्नी आ हि तन्वते नरो धन्वानि बाह्वोः|	een now o indraagni men hold in their arms and stretch their bows.
मा नो अस्मिन महाधने परा वर्क्तं गविष्टिषु|	desert us not in this great fray in battles for the sake of kine.
इन्द्राग्नी तपन्ति माघा अर्यो अरातयः|	the foemans sinful enmities indra and agni vex me sore.
अप दवेषांस्या कर्तं युयुतं सूर्यादधि|	drive those who hate me far away and keep them distant from the sun.
इन्द्राग्नी युवोरपि वसु दिव्यानि पार्थिवा|	indra and agni yours are all the treasures of the heavens and earth.
आ न इह परयछतं रयिं विश्वायुपोषसम|	here give ye us the opulence that prospers every living man.
इन्द्राग्नी उक्थवाहसा सतोमेभिर्हवनश्रुता|	o indraagni who accept the laud and hear us for our praise.
विश्वाभिर्गीर्भिरा गतमस्य सोमस्य पीतये|	come near us drawn by all our songs to drink of this our soma juice.
शुक्रं ते अन्यद यजतं ते अन्यद विषुरूपे अहनी दयौरिवासि|	like heaven art thou one form is bright one holy like day and night dissimilar in colour.
विश्वा हि माया अवसि सवधावो भद्रा ते पूषन्निहरातिरस्तु|	all magic powers thou aidest selfdepen dent auspicious be thy bounty here o pūṣan.
अजाश्वः पशुपा वाजपस्त्यो धियंजिन्वो भुवने विश्वे अर्पितः|	goatborne the guard of cattle he whose home is strength inspirer of the hymn set over all the world.
अष्ट्रां पूषा शिथिरामुद्वरीव्र्जत संचक्षाणोभुवना देव ईयते|	brandishing here and there his lightly moving goad beholding every creature pūṣan god goes forth.
यास्ते पूषन नावो अन्तः समुद्रे हिरण्ययीरन्तरिक्षे चरन्ति|	o pūṣan with thy golden ships that travel across the ocean in the airs midregion.
ताभिर्यासि दूत्यां सूर्यस्य कामेन कर्त शरव इछमानः|	thou goest on an embassy to sūrya subdued by love desirous of the glory.
पूषा सुबन्धुर्दिव आ पर्थिव्या इळस पतिर्मघवा दस्मवर्चाः|	near kinsman of the heaven and earth is pūṣan liberal lord of food of wondrous iustre.
यं देवासो अददुः सूर्यायै कामेन कर्तं तवसं सवञ्चम|	whom strong and vigorous and swiftlymoving subdued by love the deities gave to sūrya.
सं वां कर्मणा समिषा हिनोमीन्द्राविष्णू अपसस परेस्य|	indra and viṣṇu at my tasks completion i urge you on with food and sacred service.
जुषेथां यज्ञं दरविणं च धत्तमरिष्टैर्नः पथिभिः पारयन्ता|	accept the sacrifice and grant us riches leading us on by unobstructed pathways.
या विश्वासां जनितरा मतीनामिन्द्राविष्णू कलशा सोमधाना|	ye who inspire all hymns indra and viṣṇu ye vessels who contain the soma juices.
पर वां गिरः शस्यमाना अवन्तु पर सतोमासो गीयमानासो अर्कैः|	may hymns of praise that now are sung address you the lauds that are recited by the singers.
इन्द्राविष्णू मदपती मदानामा सोमं यातं दरविणो दधाना|	lords of joygiving draughts indra and viṣṇu come giving gifts of treasure to the soma.
सं वामञ्जन्त्वक्तुभिर्मतीनां सं सतोमासः शस्यमानास उक्थैः|	with brilliant rays of hymns let chanted praises repeated with the lauds adorn and deck you.
आ वामश्वासो अभिमातिषाह इन्द्राविष्णू सधमादो वहन्तु|	may your foeconquering horses bring you hither indra and viṣṇu sharers of the banquet.
जुषेथां विश्वा हवना मतीनामुप बरह्माणि शर्णुतं गिरो मे|	of all our hymns accept the invocations list to my prayers and hear the songs i sing you.
इन्द्राविष्णू तत पनयाय्यं वां सोमस्य मद उरु चक्रमाथे|	this your deed indraviṣṇu must be lauded widely ye strode in the wild joy of soma.
अक्र्णुतमन्तरिक्षं वरीयोअप्रथतं जीवसे नो रजांसि|	ye made the firmament of larger compass and made the regions broad for our existence.
इन्द्राविष्णू हविषा वाव्र्धानाग्राद्वाना नमसा रातहव्या|	strengthened with sacred offerings indraviṣṇu first eaters served with worship ana oblation.
घर्तासुती दरविणं धत्तमस्मे समुद्रः सथः कलशः सोमधानः|	fed with the holy oil vouchsafe us riches ye are the lake the vat that holds the soma.
इन्द्राविष्णू पिबतं मध्वो अस्य सोमस्य दस्रा जठरं पर्णेथाम|	drink of this meath o indra thou and viṣṇu drink ye your fill of soma wonderworkers.
आ वामन्धांसि मदिराण्यग्मन्नुप बरह्माणि शर्णुतं हवं मे|	the sweet exhilarating juice hath reached you hear ye my prayers give ear unto my calling.
उभा जिग्यथुर्न परा जयेथे न परा जिग्ये कतरश्चनैनोः|	ye twain have conquered neer have yc been conquered never hath either of the twain been vanquished.
इन्द्रश्च विष्णो यदपस्प्र्धेथां तरेधा सहस्रं वि तदैरयेथाम|	ye indraviṣṇu when ye fought the battle produced this infinite with three divisions.
यो अद्रिभित परथमजा रतावा बर्हस्पतिराङगिरसो हविष्मान|	served with oblations firstborn mountainrender aṅgiras son bṛhaspati the holy.
दविबर्हज्मा पराघर्मसत पिता न आ रोदसी वर्षभो रोरवीति|	with twicefirm path dwelling in light our father roars loudly as a bull to earth and heaven.
जनाय चिद य ईवत उ लोकं बर्हस्पतिर्देवहूतौ चकार|	bṛhaspati who made for such a people wide room and verge when gods were invocated.
घनन वर्त्राणि वि पुरो दर्दरीति जयञ्छत्रून्रमित्रान पर्त्सु साहन|	slaying his enemies breaks down their castles quelling his foes and conquering those who hate him.
बर्हस्पतिः समजयद वसूनि महो वरजान गोमतो देव एषः|	bṛhaspati in war hath won rich treasures hath won this god the great stalls filled with cattle.
अपः सिषासन सवरप्रतीतो बर्हस्पतिर्हन्त्यमित्रमर्कैः|	striving to win waters and light resistless bṛhaspati with lightning smites the foeman.
वर्षा मद इन्द्रे शलोक उक्था सचा सोमेषु सुतपा रजीषी|	strong rapturous joy praise glory are with indra impetuous god he quaffs the juice of soma.
अर्चत्र्यो मघवा नर्भ्य उक्थैर्द्युक्षो राजा गिरामक्षितोतिः|	that maghavan whom men must laud with singing heavendweller king of songs whose help is lasting.
ततुरिर्वीरो नर्यो विचेताः शरोता हवं गर्णत उर्व्यूतिः|	he friend of man most wise victorious hero hears with farreaching aid the singer call him.
वसुः शंसो नरां कारुधाया वाजी सतुतो विदथे दाति वाजम|	excellent praise of men the bards supporter strong he gives strength extolled in holy synod.
अक्षो न चक्र्योः शूर बर्हन पर ते मह्ना रिरिचे रोदस्योः|	the lofty axle of thy wheels o hero is not surpassed by heaven and earth in greatness.
वर्क्षस्य नु ते पुरुहूत वया वयूतयो रुरुहुरिन्द्र पूर्वीः|	like branches of a tree invoked of many manifold aids spring forth from thee o indra.
शचीवतस्ते पुरुशाक शाका गवामिव सरुतयः संचरणीः|	strong lord thine energies endowed with vigour are like the paths of kine converging homeward.
वत्सानां न तन्तयस्त इन्द्र दामन्वन्तो अदामानः सुदामन|	like bonds of cord indra that bind the younglings no bonds are they o thou of boundless bounty.
अन्यदद्य कर्वरमन्यदु शवोअसच्च सन मुहुराचक्रिरिन्द्रः|	one act today another act tomorrow oft indra makes what is not yet existeni.
मित्रो नो अत्र वरुणश्च पूषार्यो वशस्य पर्येतास्ति|	here have we mitra varuṇa and pūṣan to overcome the foemans domination.
वि तवदापो न पर्वतस्य पर्ष्ठादुक्थेभिरिन्द्रानयन्त यज्ञैः|	by song and sacrifice men brought the waters from thee as from a mountains ridge o indra.
तं तवाभिः सुष्टुतिभिर्वाजयन्त आजिं न जग्मुर्गिर्वाहो अश्वाः|	urging thy might with these fair lauds they seek thee o theme of song as horses rush tobattle.
न यं जरन्ति शरदो न मासा न दयाव इन्द्रमवकर्शयन्ति|	that indra whom nor months nor autumn seasons wither with age nor fleeting days enfeeble.
वर्द्धस्य चिद वर्धतामस्य तनू सतोमेभिरुक्थैश्चशस्यमाना|	still may his body wax een now so mighty glorified by the lauds and hymns that praise him.
न वीळवे नमते न सथिराय न शर्धते दस्युजूताय सतवान|	extolled he bends not to the strong the steadfast nor to the bold incited by the dasyu.
अज्रा इन्द्रस्य गिरयश्चिद रष्वा गम्भीरे चिद भवतिगाधमस्मै|	high mountains are as level plains to indra even in the deep he finds firm ground to rest on.
गम्भीरेण न उरुणामत्रिन परेषो यन्धि सुतपावन वाजान|	impetuous speeder through all depth and distance give strengthening food thou drinker of the juices.
सथा ऊ षु ऊर्ध्व ऊती अरिषण्यन्नक्तोर्व्युष्टौ परितक्म्यायाम|	stand up erect to help us unreluctant what time the gloom of night brightens to morning.
सचस्व नायमवसे अभीक इतो वा तमिन्द्र पाहि रिषः|	hasting to help come hither and protect him keep him from harm when he is here o indra.
अमा चैनमरण्ये पाहि रिषो मदेम शतहिमाः सुवीराः|	at home abroad from injury preserve him may brave sons gladden us through a hundred winters.
न तद दिवा न पर्थिव्यानु मन्ये न यज्ञेन नोत शमीभिराभिः|	this i allow not in the earth or heaven at sacrifice or in these holy duties.
उब्जन्तु तं सुभ्वः पर्वतासो नि हीयतामतियाजस्य यष्टा|	may the huge mountains crush him down degraded be atiyajas sacrificing patron.
अति वा यो मरुतो मन्यते नो बरह्म वा यः करियमाणं निनित्सात|	or he who holds us in contempt o maruts or seeks to blame the prayer that we are making.
तपूंषि तस्मै वर्जिनानि सन्तु बरह्मद्विषमभि तं शोचतु दयौः|	may agonies of burning be his portion may the sky scorch the man who hates devotion.
किमङग तवा बरह्मणः सोम गोपां किमङग तवाहुरभिशस्तिपां नः|	why then o soma do they call thee keeper of prayer why then our guardian from reproaches.
किमङग नः पश्यसि निद्यमानान बरह्मद्विषे तपुषिं हेतिमस्य|	why then beholdest thou how men revile us cast thy hot dart at him who hates devotion.
अवन्तु मामुषसो जायमाना अवन्तु मा सिन्धवः पिन्वमानाः|	may mornings as they spring to life protect me and may the rivers as they swell preserve me.
अवन्तु मा पर्वतासो धरुवासोअवन्तु मा पितरो देवहूतौ|	my guardians be the firmlyseated mountains the fathers when i call on gods defend me.
विश्वदानीं सुमनसः सयाम पश्येम नु सूर्यमुच्चरन्तम|	through all our days may we be healthy minded and look upon the sun when he arises.
तथा करद वसुपतिर्वसूनां देवानोहानोअवसागमिष्ठः|	grant this the treasurelord of treasures coming observant oftenest of gods with succour.
इन्द्रो नेदिष्ठमवसागमिष्ठः सरस्वती सिन्धुभिः पिन्वमाना|	most near most oft comes indra with protection and she sarasvatī who swells with rivers.
पर्जन्यो न ओषधीभिर्मयोभुरग्निः सुशंसः सुहवः पितेव|	parjanya bringing health with herbs and agni well lauded swift to listen like a father.
विश्वे देवास आ गत शर्णुता म इमं हवम|	hear this mine invocation come hither o universal gods.
एदं बर्हिर्नि षीदत|	be seated on this holy grass.
यो वो देवा घर्तस्नुना हव्येन परतिभूषति|	to him who comes to meet you gods with offerings bathed in holy oil.
तं विश्व उप गछथ|	approach ye one and all to him.
उप नः सूनवो गिरः शर्ण्वन्त्वम्र्तस्य ये|	all sons of immortality shall listen to the songs we sing.
सुम्र्ळीका भवन्तु नः|	and be exceeding good to us.
विश्वे देवा रताव्र्ध रतुभिर्हवनश्रुतः|	may all the gods who strengthen law with Ṛtus listening to our call.
जुषन्तां युज्यं पयः|	be pleased with theit appropriate draught.
सतोत्रमिन्द्रो मरुद्गणस्त्वष्ट्र्मान मित्रो अर्यमा|	may indra with the marut host with tvaṣṭar mitra aryaman.
इमा हव्या जुषन्त नः|	accept the laud and these our gifts.
इमं नो अग्ने अध्वरं होतर्वयुनशो यज|	o agni priest as rules ordain offer this sacrifice of ours.
चिकित्वान दैव्यं जनम|	remembering the heavenly folk.
विश्वे देवाः शर्णुतेमं हवं मे ये अन्तरिक्षे य उप दयवि षठ|	listen allgods to this mine invocation ye who inhabit heaven and airs midregions.
ये अग्निजिह्वा उत वा यजत्रा आसद्यास्मिन बर्हिषि मादयध्वम|	all ye o holy ones whose tongue is agni seated upon this sacred grass be joyful.
विश्वे देवा मम शर्ण्वन्तु यज्ञिया उभे रोदसी अपां नपाच्च मन्म|	may the allgods who claim our worship hear my thought may the two worldhalves hear it and the waters child.
मा वो वचांसि परिचक्ष्याणि वोचं सुम्नेष्विद वो अन्तमा मदेम|	let me not utter words that ye may disregard closely allied with you may we rejoice in bliss.
ये के च जमा महिनो अहिमाया दिवो जज्ञिरे अपां सधस्थे|	and those who mighty with the wiles of serpents were born on earth in heaven where waters gather.
ते अस्मभ्यमिषये विश्वमायुः कषप उस्रा वरिवस्यन्तुदेवाः|	may they vouchsafe us life of full duration may the gods kindly give us nights and mornings.
अग्नीपर्जन्याववतं धियं मेअस्मिन हवे सुहवा सुष्टुतिंनः|	at this my call o agni and parjanya help swift to hear my thought and our laudation.
इळामन्यो जनयद गर्भमन्यः परजावतीरिष आ धत्तमस्मे|	one generates holy food the other offspring so grant us food enough with store of children.
सतीर्णे बर्हिषि समिधाने अग्नौ सूक्तेन महा नमसा विवासे|	when holy grass is strewn and fire enkindled with hymn and lowly homage i invite you.
अस्मिन नो अद्य विदथे यजत्रा विश्वे देवा हविषि मादयध्वम|	allgods to day in this our great assembly rejoice ye holy in the gifts we offer.
शनथद वर्त्रमुत सनोति वाजमिन्द्रा यो अग्नी सहुरी सपर्यात|	he slays the foe and wins the spoil who worships indra and agni strong and mighty heroes.
इरज्यन्ता वसव्यस्य भूरेः सहस्तमा सहसा वाजयन्ता|	who rule as sovrans over ample riches victorious showing forth their power in conquest.
ता योधिष्टमभि गा इन्द्र नूनमपः सवरुषसो अग्न ऊळ्हः|	so battle now o indra and thou agni for cows and waters sunlight stolen mornings.
दिशः सवरुषस इन्द्र चित्रा अपो गा अग्ने युवसे नियुत्वान|	teamborne thou makest kine thine own o agni thou indra light dawns regions wondrous waters.
आ वर्त्रहणा वर्त्रहभिः शुष्मैरिन्द्र यातं नमोभिरग्ने अर्वाक|	with vṛtraslaying might indra and agni come drawn by homage o ye vṛtraslayers.
युवं राधोभिरकवेभिरिन्द्राग्ने अस्मे भवतमुत्तमेभिः|	indra and agni show yourselves among us with your supreme and unrestricted bounties.
ता हुवे ययोरिदं पप्ने विश्वं पुरा कर्तम|	i call the twain whose deeds of old have all been famed in ancient days.
इन्द्राग्नी नमर्धतः|	o indraagni harm us not.
उग्रा विघनिना मर्ध इन्द्राग्नी हवामहे|	the strong the scatterers of the foe indra and agni we invoke.
ता नो मर्ळात ईद्र्शे|	may they be kind to one like me.
हतो वर्त्राण्यार्या हतो दासानि सत्पती|	they slay our Ārya foes these lords of heroes slay our dasyu foes.
हतो विश्वा अप दविषः|	and drive our enemies away.
इन्द्राग्नी युवामिमेअभि सतोमा अनूषत|	indra and agni these our songs of praise have sounded forth to you.
पिबतं शम्भुवा सुतम|	ye who bring blessings drink the juice.
या वां सन्ति पुरुस्प्र्हो नियुतो दाशुषे नरा|	come indraagni with those teams desired of many which ye have.
इन्द्राग्नी ताभिरा गतम|	o heroes for the worshipper.
ताभिरा गछतं नरोपेदं सवनं सुतम|	with those to this libation poured ye heroes indraagni come.
इन्द्राग्नी सोमपीतये|	come ye to drink the soma juice.
तमीळिष्व यो अर्चिषा वना विश्वा परिष्वजत|	glorify him who compasses all forests with his glowing flame.
कर्ष्णाक्र्णोति जिह्वया|	and leaves them blackened with his tongue.
य इद्ध आविवासति सुम्नमिन्द्रस्य मर्त्यः|	he who gains indras bliss with fire enkindled finds an easy way.
दयुम्नाय सुतरा अपः|	over the floods to happiness.
ता नो वाजवतीरिष आशून पिप्र्तमर्वतः|	give us fleet coursers to convey indra and agni and bestow.
इन्द्रमग्निं च वोळ्हवे|	abundant strengthening food on us.
उभा वामिन्द्राग्नी आहुवध्या उभा राधसः सह मादयध्यै|	indra and agni i will call you hither and make you joyful with the gifts i offer.
उभा दाताराविषां रयीणामुभा वाजस्य सातये हुवे वाम|	ye twain are givers both of food and riches to win me strength and vigour i invoke you.
आ नो गव्येभिरश्व्यैर्वसव्यैरुप गछतम|	come unto us with riches come with wealth in horses and in kine.
सखायौ देवौ सख्याय शम्भुवेन्द्राग्नी ता हवामहे|	indra and agni we invoke you both the gods as friends for friendship bringing bliss.
इन्द्राग्नी शर्णुतं हवं यजमानस्य सुन्वतः|	indra and agni hear his call who worships with libations poured.
वीतं हव्यान्या गतं पिबतं सोम्यं मधु|	come and enjoy the offerings drink the sweetlyflavoured soma juice.
तवं हि कषैतवद यशोअग्ने मित्रो न पत्यसे|	thou agni even as mitra hast a princely glory of thine own.
तवं विचर्षणे शरवो वसो पुष्टिं न पुष्यसि|	thou active vasu makest fame increase like full prosperity.
तवां हि षमा चर्षणयो यज्ञेभिर्गीर्भिरीळते|	for verily men pray to thee with sacrifices and with songs.
तवां वाजी यात्यव्र्को रजस्तूर्विश्वचर्षणिः|	to thee the friendly courser seen of all comes speeding through the air.
सजोषस्त्वा दिवो नरो यज्ञस्य केतुमिन्धते|	of one accord men kindle thee heavens signal of the sacrifice.
यद ध सय मानुषो जनः सुम्नायुर्जुह्वे अध्वरे|	when craving bliss this race of man invites thee to the solemn rite.
रधद यस्ते सुदानवे धिया मर्तः शशमते|	let the man thrive who travails sore in prayer far thee the bountiful.
ऊती ष बर्हतो दिवो दविषो अंहो न तरति|	he with the help of lofty dyaus comes safe through straits of enmity.
समिधा यस्त आहुतिं निशितिं मर्त्यो नशत|	the mortal who with fuel lights thy flame and offers unto thee.
वयावन्तंस पुष्यति कषयमग्ने शतायुषम|	supports a house with many a branch agni to live a hundred years.
तवेषस्ते धूम रण्वति दिवि षञ्छुक्र आततः|	thy bright smoke lifts itself aloft and farextended shines in heaven.
सूरो न हि दयुता तवं कर्पा पावक रोचसे|	for purifier like the sun thou beamest with thy radiant glow.
अधा हि विक्ष्वीड्योअसि परियो नो अतिथिः|	for in mens houses thou must be glorified as a wellloved guest.
रण्वः पुरीव जूर्यः सूनुर्न तरययाय्यः|	gay like an elder in a fort claiming protection like a son.
करत्वा हि दरोणे अज्यसेअग्ने वाजी न कर्त्व्यः|	thou agni like an able steed art urged by wisdom in the wood.
परिज्मेवस्वधा गयोअत्यो न हवार्यः शिशुः|	thou art like wind food home art thou like a young horse that runs astray.
तवं तया चिदच्युताग्ने पशुर्न यवसे|	een things imperishable thou o agni like a gazing ox.
धामा ह यत ते अजर वना वर्श्चन्ति शिक्वसः|	eatest when hosts eternal one of thee the mighty rend the woods.
वेषि हयध्वरीयतामग्ने होता दमे विशाम|	agni thou enterest as priest the home of men who sacrifice.
सम्र्धो विश्पते कर्णु जुषस्व हव्यमङगिरः|	lord of the people prosper them accept the ofrering aṅgiras.
अछा नो मित्रमहो देव देवानग्ने वोचः सुमतिं रोदस्योः|	o agni god with mitras might call hither the favour of the gods from earth and heaven.
वीहि सवस्तिं सुक्षितिं दिवो नॄन दविषो अंहांसि दुरितातरेम ता तरेम तवावसा तरेम|	bring weal from heaven that men may dwell securely may we oercome the foes malign oppressions may we oercome them through thy help oercome them.
हुवे वः सूनुं सहसो युवानमद्रोघवाचं मतिभिर्यविष्ठम|	i invocate your son of strength the youthful with hymns the youngest god whose speech is guileless.
य इन्वति दरविणानि परचेता विश्ववाराणि पुरुवारोध्रुक|	sage who sends wealth comprising every treasure bringer of many boons devoid of malice.
तवे वसूनि पुर्वणीक होतर्दोषा वस्तोरेरिरे यज्ञियासः|	at eve and morn thy pious servants bring thee their precious gifts o priest of many aspects.
कषामेव विश्वा भुवनानि यस्मिन सं सौभगानि दधिरेपावके|	on whom the purifier all things living as on firm ground their happiness have stablished.
तवं विक्षु परदिवः सीद आसु करत्वा रथीरभवो वार्याणाम|	thou from of old hast dwelt among these people by mental power the charioteer of blessings.
अत इनोषि विधते चिकित्वो वयानुषग जातवेदो वसूनि|	hence sendest thou o sapient jātavedas to him who serves thee treasures in succession.
यो नः सनुत्यो अभिदासदग्ने यो अन्तरो मित्रमहो वनुष्यात|	agni whoever secretly attacks us the neighbour thou with mitras might who harms us.
तमजरेभिर्व्र्षभिस्तव सवैस्तपा तपिष्ठ तपसा तपस्वान|	burn him with thine own steers for ever youthful burning with burning heat thou fiercest burner.
यस्ते यज्ञेन समिधा य उक्थैरर्केभिः सूनो सहसो ददाशत|	he who serves thee with sacrifice and fuel with hymn o son of strength and chanted praises.
स मर्त्येष्वम्र्त परचेता राया दयुम्नेन शरवसा वि भाति|	shines out immortal in the midst of mortals a sage with wealth with splendour and with glory.
स तत कर्धीषितस्तूयमग्ने सप्र्धो बाधस्व सहसा सहस्वान|	do this o agni when we urge thee quickly triumphant in thy might subdue our foemen.
यच्छस्यसे दयुभिरक्तो वचोभिस्तज्जुषस्व जरितुर्घोषि मन्म|	when thou art praised with words and decked with brightness accept this chanted hymn the singers worship.
अश्याम तं काममग्ने तवोती अश्याम रयिं रयिवः सुवीरम|	help us that we may gain this wish o agni gain riches wealthy one with store of heroes.
अश्याम वाजमभि वाजयन्तोअश्याम दयुम्नमजराजरं ते|	desiring strength from thee may we be strengthened and win eternal thine eternal glory.
इन्द्रा नु पूषणा वयं सख्याय सवस्तये|	indra and pūṣan will we call for friend ship and prosperity.
हुवेम वाजसातये|	and for the winning of the spoil.
सोममन्य उपासदत पातवे चम्वोः सुतम|	one by the soma sits to drink juice which the mortar hath expressed.
करम्भमन्य इछति|	the other longs for curd and meal.
अजा अन्यस्य वह्नयो हरी अन्यस्य सम्भ्र्ता|	goats are the team that draws the one the other hath bay steeds at hand.
ताभ्यां वर्त्राणि जिघ्नते|	with both of these he slays the fiends.
यदिन्द्रो अनयद रितो महीरपो वर्षन्तमः|	when indra wondrous strong brought down the streams the mighty waterfloods.
तत्र पूषाभवत सचा|	pūṣan was standing by his side.
तां पूष्णः सुमतिं वयं वर्क्षस्य पर वयामिव|	to this to pūṣans favouring love and indras may we closely cling.
इन्द्रस्य चा रभामहे|	as to a trees extended bough.
उत पूषणं युवामहेअभीशून्रिव सारथिः|	as one who drives a car draws in his reins may we draw pūṣan near.
मह्या इन्द्रं सवस्तये|	and indra for our great success.
सं च तवे जग्मुर्गिर इन्द्र पूर्वीर्वि च तवद यन्ति विभ्वोमनीषाः|	full many songs have met in thee o indra and many a noble thought from thee proceedeth.
पूरा नूनं च सतुतय रषीणां पस्प्र्ध्र इन्द्रे अध्युक्थार्का|	now and of old the eulogies of sages their holy hymns and lauds have yearned for indra.
पुरुहूतो यः पुरुगूर्त रभ्वानेकः पुरुप्रशस्तो अस्ति यज्ञैः|	he praised of many bold invoked of many alone is glorified at sacrifices.
रथो न महे शवसे युजानोअस्माभिरिन्द्रो अनुमाद्यो भूत|	like a car harnessed for some great achievement indra must be the cause of our rejoicing.
न यं हिंसन्ति धीतयो न वाणीरिन्द्रं नक्षन्तीदभि वर्धयन्तीः|	they make their way to indra and exalt him bim whom no prayers and no laudations trouble.
यदि सतोतारः शतं यत सहस्रं गर्णन्ति गिर्वणसं शं तदस्मै|	for when a hundred or a thousand singers laud him who loves the song their praise delights him.
अस्मा एतद दिव्यर्चेव मासा मिमिक्ष इन्द्रे नययामि सोमः|	as brightness mingles with the moon in heaven the offered soma yearns to mix with indra.
जनं न धन्वन्नभि सं यदापः सत्रा वाव्र्धुर्हवनानि यज्ञैः|	like water brought to men in desert places our gifts at sacrifice have still refreshed him.
अस्मा एतन मह्याङगूषमस्मा इन्द्राय सतोत्रं मतिभिरवाचि|	to him this mighty eulogy to indra hath this our laud been uttered by the poets.
असद यथा महति वर्त्रतूर्य इन्द्रो विश्वायुरविता वर्धश्च|	that in the great encounter with the foemen loved of all life indra may guard and help us.
यस्य तयच्छम्बरं मदे दिवोदासाय रन्धयः|	in whose wild joy thou madest once Śambara divodāsas prey.
अयं स सोम इन्द्र ते सुतः पिब|	this soma is pressed out for thee o indra drink.
यस्य तीव्रसुतं मदं मध्यमन्तं च रक्षसे|	whose gladdening draught shed from the points thou guardest in the midst and end.
अयं स|	this soma is pressed out for thee o indra drink.
यस्य गा अन्तरश्मनो मदे दर्ळ्हा अवास्र्जः|	in whose wild joy thou settest free the kine held fast within the rock.
अयं स|	this soma is pressed out for thee o indra drink.
यस्य मन्दानो अन्धसो माघोनं दधिषे शवः|	this in whose juice delighting thou gainest the might of maghavan.
अयं स|	this soma is pressed out for thee o indra drink.
एषा सया नो दुहिता दिवोजाः कषितीरुछन्ती मानुषीरजीगः|	shedding her light on human habitations this child of heaven hath called us from our slumber.
या भानुना रुशता राम्यास्वज्ञायि तिरस्तमसश्चिदक्तून|	she who at nighttime with her argent lustre hath shown herself een through the shades of darkness.
वि तद ययुररुणयुग्भिरश्वैश्चित्रं भान्त्युषसश्चन्द्ररथाः|	all this with redrayed steeds have they divided the dawns on bright cars shine in wondrous fashion.
अग्रं यज्ञस्य बर्हतो नयन्तीर्वि ता बाधन्तेतम ऊर्म्यायाः|	they bringing near the stately rites commencement drive far away the nights surrounding shadows.
शरवो वाजमिषमूर्जं वहन्तीर्नि दाशुष उषसो मर्त्याय|	dawns bringing hither to the man who worships glory and power and might and food and vigour.
मघोनीर्वीरवत पत्यमाना अवो धात विधते रत्नमद्य|	opulent with imperial sway like heroes favour your servant and this day enrich him.
इदा हि वो विधते रत्नमस्तीदा वीराय दाशुष उषासः|	now is there treasure for the man who serves you now for the hero dawns who brings oblation.
इदा विप्राय जरते यदुक्था नि षम मावते वहथ पुर चित|	now for the singer when he sings the praisesong even to one like me ye brought aforetime.
इदा हि त उषो अद्रिसानो गोत्रा गवामन्गिरसो गर्णन्ति|	o dawn who standest on the mountain ridges aṅgirases now praise thy stalls of cattle.
वयर्केण बिभिदुर्ब्रह्मणा च सत्या नर्णामभवद देवहूतिः|	with prayer and holy hymn they burst them open the heroes calling on the gods was fruitful.
उछा दिवो दुहितः परत्नवन नो भरद्वाजवद विधते मघोनि|	shine on us as of old thou child of heavenon him rich maid who serves like bharadvāja.
सुवीरं रयिं गर्णते रिरीह्युरुगायमधि धेहि शरवो नः|	give to the singer wealth with noble heroes and upon us bestow widespreading glory.
सुत इत तवं निमिश्ल इन्द्र सोमे सतोमे बरह्मणि शस्यमानौक्थे|	thou art attached to pressedout soma indra at laud at prayer and when the hymn is chanted.
यद वा युक्ताभ्यां मघवन हरिभ्यां बिभ्रद वज्रम्बाह्वोरिन्द्र यासि|	or when with yoked bays maghavan thou comest o indra bearing in thine arms the thunder.
यद वा दिवि पार्ये सुष्विमिन्द्र वर्त्रहत्येअवसि शूरसातौ|	or when on that decisive day thou holpest the presser of the juice at vṛtras slaughter.
यद वा दक्षस्य बिभ्युषो अबिभ्यदरन्धयः शर्धत इन्द्र दस्यून|	or when thou while the strong one feared undaunted gavest to death indra the daring dasyus.
पाता सुतमिन्द्रो अस्तु सोमं परणेनीरुग्रो जरितारमूती|	let indra drink the pressedout soma helper and mighty guide of him who sings his praises.
कर्ता वीराय सुष्वय उ लोकं दाता वसु सतुवते कीरये चित|	he gives the hero room who pours oblations and treasure even to the lowly singer.
गन्तेयान्ति सवना हरिभ्यां बभ्रिर्वज्रं पपिः सोमं ददिर्गाः|	een humble rites with his bay steeds he visits he wields the bolt drinks soma gives us cattle.
कर्ता वीरं नर्यं सर्ववीरं शरोता हवंग्र्णत सतोमवाहाः|	he makes the valiant rich in store of heroes accepts our praise and hears the singers calling.
अस्मै वयं यद वावान तद विविष्म इन्द्राय यो नः परदिवो अपस कः|	what he hath longed for we have brought to indra who from the days of old hath done us service.
सुते सोमे सतुमसि शंसदुक्थेन्द्राय बरह्म वर्धनं यथासत|	while soma flows we will sing hymn and laud him so that our prayer may streng then indras vigour.
बरह्माणि हि चक्र्षे वर्धनानि तावत त इन्द्र मतिभिर्विविष्मः|	thou hast made prayer the means of thine exalting therefore we wait on thee with hymns o indra.
सुते सोमे सुतपाः शन्तमानि रान्द्र्या करियास्म वक्षणानि यज्ञैः|	may we by the pressed soma somadrinker bring thee with sacrifice blissful sweet refreshment.
स नो बोधि पुरोळाशं रराणः पिबा तु सोमं गोर्जीकमिन्द्र|	mark well our sacrificial cake delighted indra drink soma and the milk commingled.
एदं बर्हिर्यजमानस्य सीदोरुं कर्धि तवायत उ लोकम|	here on the sacrificers grass be seated give ample room to thy devoted servant.
स मन्दस्वा हयनु जोषमुग्र पर तवा यज्ञास इमे अश्नुवन्तु|	o mighty one be joyful as thou willest let these our sacrifices reach and find thee.
परेमे हवासः पुरुहूतमस्मे आ तवेयं धीरवस इन्द्र यम्याः|	and may this hymn and these our invocations turn thee whom many men invoke to help us.
तं वः सखायः सं यथा सुतेषु सोमेभिरीं पर्णता भोजमिन्द्रम|	friends when thejuices flow replenish duly your own your bounteous indra with the soma.
कुवित तस्मा असति नो भराय न सुष्विमिन्द्रोअवसे मर्धाति|	will it not aid him to support us indra spares him who sheds the juice to win his favour.
एवेदिन्द्रः सुते अस्तावि सोमे भरद्वाजेषु कषयदिन मघोनः|	while soma flowed thus indra hath been lauded ruler of nobles mid the bharadvājas.
असद यथा जरित्र उत सूरिरिन्द्रो रायो विश्ववारस्य दाता|	that indra may become the singers patron and give him wealth in every kind of treasure.
मूर्धानं दिवो अरतिं पर्थिव्या वैश्वानरं रत आ जातमग्निम|	him messenger of earth and head of heaven agni vaiśvānara born in holy order.
कविं सम्राजमतिथिं जनानामासन्ना पात्रं जनयन्त देवाः|	the sage the king the guest of men a vessel fit for their mouths the gods have generated.
नाभिं यज्ञानां सदनं रयीणां महामाहावमभिसं नवन्त|	him have they praised midpoint of sacrifices great cistern of libations seat of riches.
वैश्वानरं रथ्यमध्वराणां यज्ञस्य केतुं जनयन्त देवाः|	vaiśvānara conveyer of oblations ensign of worship have the gods engendered.
तवद विप्रो जायते वाज्यग्ने तवद वीरासो अभिमातिषाहः|	from thee o agni springs the mighty singer from thee come heroes who subdue the foeman.
वैश्वानर तवमस्मासु धेहि वसूनि राजन सप्र्हयाय्याणि|	o king vaiśvānara bestow thou on us excellent treasures worthy to belonged fo r.
तवां विश्वे अम्र्त जायमानं शिशुं न देवा अभि सं नवन्ते|	to thee immortal when to life thou springest all the gods sing for joy as to their infant.
तव करतुभिरम्र्तत्वमायन वैश्वानर यत पित्रोरदीदेः|	they by thy mental powers were made immortal vaiśvānara when thou shonest from thy parents.
वैश्वानर तव तानि वरतानि महान्यग्ने नकिरा दधर्ष|	agni vaiśvānara no one hath ever resisted these thy mighty ordinances.
यज्जायमानः पित्रोरुपस्थेअविन्दः केतुं वयुनेष्वह्नाम|	when thou arising from thy parents bosom foundest the light for days appointed courses.
वैश्वानरस्य विमितानि चक्षसा सानूनि दिवो अम्र्तस्य केतुना|	the summits of the heaven are traversed through and through by the immortals light vaiśvānaras brilliancy.
तस्येदु विश्वा भुवनाधि मूर्धनि वया इव रुरुहुःसप्त विस्रुहः|	all creatures in existence rest upon his head the seven swiftflowing streams have grown like branches forth.
वि यो रजांस्यमिमीत सुक्रतुर्वैश्वानरो वि दिवो रोचना कविः|	vaiśvānara who measured out the realms of air sage very wise who made the lucid spheres of heaven.
परि यो विश्वा भुवनानि पप्रथेअदब्धो गोपा अम्र्तस्य रक्षिता|	the undeceivable who spread out all the worlds keeper is he and guard of immortality.
पिबा सोममभि यमुग्र तर्द ऊर्वं गव्यं महि गर्णानैन्द्र|	drink soma mighty one for which when lauded thou breakest through the cattlestall o indra.
वि यो धर्ष्णो वधिषो वज्रहस्त विश्वा वर्त्रममित्रिया शवोभिः|	thou who o bold one armed with thunder smotest vṛtra with might and every hostile being.
स ईं पाहि य रजीषी तरुत्रो यः शिप्रवान वर्षभो यो मतीनाम|	drink it thou god who art impetuous victor lord of our hymns with beauteousjaws the hero.
यो गोत्रभिद वज्रभ्र्द यो हरिष्ठाः स इन्द्र चित्रानभि तर्न्धि वाजान|	render of kinestalls carborne thunderwielding so pierce thy way to wondrous strength o indra.
एवा पाहि परत्नथा मन्दतु तवा शरुधि बरह्म वाव्र्धस्वोतगीर्भिः|	drink as of old and let the draught delight thee hear thou our prayer and let our songs exalt thee.
आविः सूर्यं कर्णुहि पीपिहीषो जहि शत्रून्रभि गा इन्द्र तर्न्धि|	make the sun visible make food abundant slaughter the foes pierce through and free the cattle.
ते तवा मदा बर्हदिन्द्र सवधाव इमे पीता उक्षयन्त दयुमन्तम|	these gladdening drops o indra selfsustainer quaffed shall augment thee in thy mighty splendour.
महामनूनं तवसं विभूतिं मत्सरासो जर्ह्र्षन्त परसाहम|	yea let the cheering drops delight thee greatly great perfect strong powerful allsubduing.
येभिः सूर्यमुषसं मन्दसानोअवासयोअप दर्ल्हानि दर्द्रत|	gladdened whereby bursting the firm enclosures thou gavest splendour to the sun and morning.
महामद्रिं परि गा इन्द्र सन्तं नुत्था अच्युतं सदसस परि सवात|	the mighty rock that compassed in the cattle neer moved thou shookest from its seat o indra.
तव करत्वा तव तद दंसनाभिरामासु पक्वं शच्या नि दीधः|	thou with thy wisdom power and works of wonder hast stored the ripe milk in the raw cows udders.
और्णोर्दुर उस्रियाभ्यो वि दर्ळ्होदूर्वाद गा अस्र्जो अङगिरस्वान|	unbarred the firm doors for the kine of morning and with the aṅgirases set free the cattle.
पप्राथ कषां महि दण्सो वयुर्वीमुप दयां रष्वो बर्हदिन्द्र सतभायः|	thou hast spread out wide earth a mighty marvel and high thyself propped lofty heaven o indra.
अधारयो रोदसी देवपुत्रे परत्ने मातरा यह्वी रतस्य|	both worlds whose sons are gods thou hast supported young mothers from old time ofholy order.
अध तवा विश्वे पुर इन्द्र देवा एकं तवसं दधिरे भराय|	yea indra all the deities installed thee their one strong champion in the van for battle.
अदेवो यदभ्यौहिष्ट देवान सवर्षाता वर्णत इन्द्रमत्र|	what time the godless was the gods assailant indra they chose to win the light of heaven.
अध दयौश्चित ते अप सा नु वज्राद दवितानमद भियसा सवस्य मन्योः|	yea een that heaven itself of old bent backward before thy bolt in terror of its anger.
अहिं यदिन्द्रो अभ्योहसानं नि चिद विश्वायुः शयथे जघान|	when indra life of every living creature smote down within his lair the assailing dragon.
अध तवष्टा ते मह उग्र वज्रं सहस्रभ्र्ष्टिं वव्र्तच्छताश्रिम|	yea strong one tvaṣṭar turned for thee the mighty the bolt with thousand spikes and hundred edges.
निकाममरमणसं येन नवन्तमहिं सं पिणग्र्जीषिन|	eager and prompt at will wherewith thou crushedst the boasting dragon o impetuous hero.
वर्धान यं विश्वे मरुतः सजोषाः पचच्छतं महिषानिन्द्र तुभ्यम|	he dressed a hundred buffaloes o indra for thee whom all accordant maruts strengthen.
पूषा विष्णुस्त्रीणि सरांसि धावन वर्त्रहणं मदिरमंशुमस्मै|	he pūṣan viṣṇu poured forth three great vessels to him the juice that cheers that slaughters vṛtra.
आ कषोदो महि वर्तं नदीनां परिष्ठितमस्र्ज ऊर्मिमपाम|	thou settest free the rushing wave of waters the floods great swell encompassed and obstructed.
तासामनु परवत इन्द्र पन्थां परार्दयो नीचीरपसः समुद्रम|	along steep slopes their course thou tumedst indra directed downward speeding to the ocean.
एवा ता विश्वा चक्र्वांसमिन्द्रं महामुग्रमजुर्यं सहोदाम|	so may our new prayer bring thee to protect us thee wellarmed hero with thy bolt of thunder.
सुवीरं तवा सवायुधं सुवज्रमा बरह्म नव्यमवसे वव्र्त्यात|	indra who made these worlds the strong the ty who never groweth old the victorygiver.
स नो वाजाय शरवस इषे च राये धेहि दयुमत इन्द्र विप्रान|	so indra form us brilliant holy singers for strength for glory and for food and riches.
भरद्वाजे नर्वत इन्द्र सूरीन दिवि च समैधि पार्ये न इन्द्र|	give bharadvāja hero patrons indra indra be ours upon the day of trial.
अया वाजं देवहितं सनेम मदेम शतहिमाः सुवीराः|	with this may we obtain strength godappointed and brave sons gladden us through a hundred winters.
कव तया वल्गू पुरुहूताद्य दूतो न सतोमोअविदन नमस्वान|	where hath the hymn with reverence like an envoy found both fair gods today invoked of many.
आ यो अर्वां नासत्या ववर्त परेष्ठा हयसथो अस्य मन्मन|	hymn that hath brought the two nāsatyas hither to this mans thought be ye both gods most friendly.
अरं मे गन्तं हवनायास्मै गर्णाना यथा पिबाथो अन्धः|	come readily to this mine invocation lauded with songs that ye may drink the juices.
परि ह तयद वर्तिर्याथो रिषो न यत परो नान्तरस्तुतुर्यात|	compass this house to keep it from the foeman that none may force it either near or distant.
अकारि वामन्धसो वरीमन्नस्तारि बर्हिः सुप्रायणतमम|	juice in wide room hath been prepared to feast you for you the grass is strewn most soft to tread on.
उत्तानहस्तो युवयुर्ववन्दा वां नक्षन्तो अद्रय आञ्जन|	with lifted hands your servant hath adored you yearningfor you the pressstones shed the liquid.
ऊर्ध्वो वामग्निरध्वरेष्वस्थात पर रातिरेति जूर्णिनीघ्र्ताची|	agni uplifts him at your sacrifices forth goes the oblation dropping oil and glowing.
पर होता गूर्तमना उराणोअयुक्त यो नासत्या हवीमन|	up stands the gratefulminded priest elected appointed to invoke the two nāsatyas.
अधि शरिये दुहिता सूर्यस्य रथं तस्थौ पुरुभुजा शतोतिम|	lords of great wealth for glory sūryas daughter mounted your car that brings a hundred succours.
पर मायाभिर्मायिना भूतमत्र नरा नर्तू जनिमन यज्ञियानाम|	famed for your magic arts were ye magicians amid the race of gods ye dancing heroes.
युवं शरीभिर्दर्शताभिराभिः शुभे पुष्टिमूहथुःसूर्यायाः|	ye twain with these your glories fair to look on brought to win victory rich gifts for sūrya.
पर वां वयो वपुषेअनु पप्तन नक्षद वाणी सुष्टुता धिष्ण्या वाम|	after you flew your birds marvels of beauty dear to our hearts the song well lauded reached you.
आ वां वयोअश्वासो वहिष्ठा अभि परयो नासत्या वहन्तु|	may your winged coursers best to draw nāsatyas convey you to the object of your wishes.
पर वां रथो मनोजवा असर्जीषः पर्क्ष इषिधो अनु पूर्वीः|	swift as the thought your car hath been sent onward to food of many a sort and dainty viands.
पुरु हि वां पुरुभुजा देष्णं धेनुं न इषं पिन्वतमसक्राम|	lords of great wealth manifold is your bounty ye filled our cow with food that never faileth.
सतुतश्च वां माध्वी सुष्टुतिश्च रसाश्च ये वामनु रातिमग्मन|	lovers of sweetness yours are praise and singers and poured libations which have sought your favour.
उत म रज्रे पुरयस्य रघ्वी सुमीळ्हे शतं पेरुके च पक्वा|	mine were two mares of puraya brown swiftfooted a hundred with sumidha food with peruk.
शाण्डो दाद धिरणिनः समद्दिष्टीन दश वशासो अभिषाच रष्वान|	sanda gave ten golddecked and welltrained horses tame and obedient and of lofty stature.
सं वां शता नासत्या सहस्राश्वानां पुरुपन्था गिरे दात|	nāsatyas purupanthas offered hundreds thousands of steeds to him who sang your praises.
भरद्वाजाय वीर नू गिरे दाद धता रक्षांसि पुरुदंससा सयुः|	gave heroes to the singer bharadvāja yewonderworkers let the fiends be slaughtered.
आ वां सुम्ने वरिमन सूरिभिः षयाम|	may i with princes share your bliss in freedom.
शरुष्टी वां यज्ञ उद्यतः सजोषा मनुष्वद वर्क्तबर्हिषो यजध्यै|	his honouring rite whose grass is trimmed is offered swiftly to you in manus wise accordant.
आ य इन्द्रावरुणाविषे अद्य महे सुम्नाय मह आववर्तत|	the rite which indravaruṇa shall carry this day to high success and glorious issue.
ता हि शरेष्ठा देवताता तुजा शूराणां शविष्ठाता हि भूतम|	for at gods worship they are best through vigour they have become the strongest of the heroes.
मघोनां मंहिष्ठा तुविशुष्म रतेन वर्त्रतुरा सर्वसेना|	with mighty strength most liberal of the princes chiefs of the host by law made vṛtras slayers.
ता गर्णीहि नमस्येभिः शूषैः सुम्नेभिरिन्द्रावरुणा चकाना|	praise those twain gods for powers that merit worship indra and varuṇa for bliss the joyous.
वज्रेणान्यः शवसा हन्ति वर्त्रं सिषक्त्यन्यो वर्जनेषु विप्रः|	one with his might and thunderbolt slays vṛtra the other as a sage stands near in troubles.
गनाश्च यन नरश्च वाव्र्धन्त विश्वे देवासो नरां सवगूर्ताः|	though dames and men have waxen strong and mighty and all the gods selfpraised among the heroes.
परैभ्य इन्द्रावरुणा महित्वा दयौश्च पर्थिवि भूतमुर्वी|	ye indravaruṇa have in might surpassed them and thus were ye spread wide o earth and heaven.
स इत सुदानुः सववान रतावेन्द्रा यो वां वरुण दाशतित्मन|	righteous is he and liberal and helpful who indravaruṇa brings you gifts with gladness.
इषा स दविषस्तरेद दास्वान वंसद रयिं रयिवतश्च जनान|	that bounteous man through food shall conquer faemen and win him opulence and wealthy people.
यं युवं दाश्वध्वराय देवा रयिं धत्थो वसुमन्तं पुरुक्षुम|	may wealth which ye bestow in food and treasure on him who brings you gifts and sacrifices.
अस्मे स इन्द्रावरुणावपि षयात पर यो भनक्ति वनुषामशस्तीः|	wealth gods which breaks the curse of those who vex us be indravaruṇa een our own possession.
उत नः सुत्रात्रो देवगोपाः सूरिभ्य इन्द्रावरुणा रयिः षयात|	so also indravaruṇa may our princes have riches swift to save with gods to guard them.
येषां शुष्मः पर्तनासु साह्वान पर सद्यो दयुम्नातिरते ततुरिः|	they whose great might gives victory in battles and their triumphant glory spreads with swiftness.
नू न इन्द्रावरुणा गर्णाना पर्ङकतं रयिं सौश्रवसाय देवा|	indra and varuṇa gods whom we are lauding mingle ye wealth with our heroic glory.
इत्था गर्णन्तो महिनस्य शर्धोअपो न नावा दुरितातरेम|	may we who praise the strength of what is mighty pass dangers as with boats we cross the waters.
पर सम्राजे बर्हते मन्म नु परियमर्च देवाय वरुणाय सप्रथः|	now will i sing a dear and farextending hymn to varuṇa the god sublime imperial lord.
अयं य उर्वी महिना महिव्रतः करत्वा विभात्यजरो न शोचिषा|	who mighty governor eternal as with flame illumines both wide worlds with majesty and power.
इन्द्रावरुणा सुतपाविमं सुतं सोमं पिबतं मद्यं धर्तव्रता|	true to law indravaruṇa drinkers of the juice drink this pressed soma which shall give you rapturous joy.
युवो रथो अध्वरं देववीतये परति सवसरमुप याति पीतये|	your chariot cometh to the banquet of the gods to sacrifice as it were home that ye may drink.
इन्द्रावरुणा मधुमत्तमस्य वर्ष्णः सोमस्य वर्षणा वर्षेथाम|	indra and varuṇa drink your fill ye heroes of this invigorating sweetest soma.
इदं वामन्धः परिषिक्तमस्मे आसद्यास्मिन बर्हिषि मादयेथाम|	this juice is shed by us that ye may quaff it on this trimmed grass be seated and rejoice you.
अर्वाग रथं विश्ववारं त उग्रेन्द्र युक्तासो हरयो वहन्तु|	let thy bay horses yoked o mighty indra bring thy car hither fraught with every blessing.
कीरिश्चिद धि तवा हवते सवर्वान रधीमहि सधमादस्तेद्य|	for thee the heavenly een the poor invoketh may we this day thy feastcompanions prosper.
परो दरोणे हरयः कर्माग्मन पुनानास रज्यन्तो अभूवन|	forth to the vat the brown drops flow for service and purified proceed directly forward.
इन्द्रो नो अस्य पूर्व्यः पपीयाद दयुक्षो मदस्य सोम्यस्य राजा|	may indra drink of this our guest aforetime celestial king of the strong draught of soma.
आसस्राणासः शवसानमछेन्द्रं सुचक्रे रथ्यासो अश्वाः|	bringing us hitherward allpotent indra on wellwheeled chariot may the steeds who bear him.
अभि शरव रज्यन्तो वहेयुर्नू चिन नु वायोरम्र्तं विदस्येत|	convey him on the road direct to glory and neer may vāyus amṛta cease and fail him.
वरिष्ठो अस्य दक्षिणामियर्तीन्द्रो मघोनां तुविकूर्मितमः|	supreme he stirs this man to give the guerdonindra most efficacious of the princes.
यया वज्रिवः परियास्यंहो मघा च धर्ष्णो दयसे वि सूरीन|	wherewith o thunderer thou removest sorrow and bold one partest wealth among the nobles.
इन्द्रो वाजस्य सथविरस्य दातेन्द्रो गीर्भिर्वर्धतां वर्द्धमहाः|	indra is hewho gives enduring vigour may our songs magnify the god most mighty.
इन्द्रो वर्त्रं हनिष्ठो अस्तु सत्वा ता सूरिः पर्णति तूतुजानः|	best vṛtraslayer be the hero indra these things he gives as prince with strong endeavour.
आ गावो अग्मन्नुत भद्रमक्रन सीदन्तु गोष्ठे रणयन्त्वस्मे|	the kine have come and brought good fortune let them rest in the cowpen and be happy near us.
परजावतीः पुरुरूपा इह सयुरिन्द्राय पूर्वीरुषसो दुहानाः|	here let them stay prolific manycoloured and yield through many morns their milk for indra.
इन्द्रो यज्वने पर्णते च शिक्षत्युपेद ददाति न सवं मुषायति|	indra aids him who offers sacrifice and gifts he takes not what is his and gives him more thereto.
भूयोभूयो रयिमिदस्य वर्धयन्नभिन्ने खिल्ये निदधाति देवयुम|	increasing ever more and ever more his wealth he makes the pious dwell within unbroken bounds.
न ता नशन्ति न दभाति तस्करो नासामामित्रो वयथिरादधर्षति|	these are neer lost no robber ever injures them no evilminded foe attempts to harass them.
देवांश्च याभिर्यजते ददाति च जयोगित ताभिः सचते गोपतिः सह|	the master of the kine lives many a year with these the cows whereby he pours his gifts and serves the gods.
न ता अर्वा रेणुककाटो अश्नुते न संस्क्र्तत्रमुप यन्ति ता अभि|	the charger with his dusty brow oertakes them not and never to the shambles do they take their way.
उरुगायमभयं तस्य ता अनु गावो मर्तस्य विचरन्ति यज्वनः|	these cows the cattle of the pious worshipper roam over widespread pasture where no danger is.
गावो भगो गाव इन्द्रो मे अछान गावः सोमस्य परथमस्य भक्षः|	to me the cows seem bhaga they seem indra they seem a portion of the firstpoured soma.
इमा या गावः स जनास इन्द्र इछामीद धर्दामनसा चिदिन्द्रम|	these present cows they o ye indra i long for indra with my heart and spirit.
यूयं गावो मेदयथा कर्शं चिदश्रीरं चित कर्णुथा सुप्रतीकम|	o cows ye fatten een the worn and wasted and make the unlovely beautiful tolook on.
भद्रं गर्हं कर्णुथ भद्रवाचो बर्हद वो वय उच्यते सभासु|	prosper my house ye with auspicious voices your power is glorified in our assemblies.
परजावतीः सूयवसं रिशन्तीः शुद्धा अपः सुप्रपाणेपिबन्तीः|	crop goodly pasturage and be prolific drink pure sweet water at good drinking places.
मा व सतेन ईशत माघशंसः परि वो हेती रुद्रस्य वर्ज्याः|	never be thief or sinful man your matter and may the dart of rudra still avoid you.
उपेदमुपपर्चनमासु गोषूप पर्च्यताम|	now let this close admixture be close intermigled with these cows.
उप रषभस्य रेतस्युपेन्द्र तव वीर्ये|	mixt with the steers prolific flow and indra with thy hero might.
अहेळमान उप याहि यज्ञं तुभ्यं पवन्त इन्दवः सुतासः|	come gracious to our sacrifice o indra pressed somadrops are purified to please thee.
गावो न वज्रिन सवमोको अछेन्द्रा गहि परथमो यज्ञियानाम|	as cattle seek their home so thunderwielder come indra first of those who claim our worship.
या ते काकुत सुक्र्ता या वरिष्ठा यया शश्वत पिबसि मध्व ऊर्मिम|	with that wellformed most wideextending palate wherewith thou ever drinkest streams of sweetness.
तया पाहि पर ते अध्वर्युरस्थात सं ते वज्रोवर्ततामिन्द्र गव्युः|	drink thou the adhvaryu standeth up before thee let thy spoilwinning thunderbolt attend thee.
एष दरप्सो वर्षभो विश्वरूप इन्द्राय वर्ष्णे समकारि सोमः|	this drop steerstrong and omniform the soma hath been made ready for the bull for india.
एतं पिब हरिव सथातरुग्र यस्येशिषे परदिवि यस्तेन्नम|	drink this lord of the bays thou strong supporter this that is thine of old thy food for ever.
सुतः सोमो असुतादिन्द्र वस्यानयं शरेयाञ्चिकितुषे रणाय|	soma when pressed excels the unpressed soma better for one who knows to give him pleasure.
एतं तितिर्व उप याहि यज्ञं तेन विश्वास्तविषीरा पर्णस्व|	come to this sacrifice of ours o victor replenish all thy powers with this libation.
हवयामसि तवेन्द्र याह्यर्वां अरं ते सोमस्तन्वे भवाति|	we call on thee o indra come thou hither sufficient be the soma for thy body.
शतक्रतो मादयस्वा सुतेषु परास्मानव पर्तनासु पर विक्षु|	rejoice thee Śatakratu in the juices guard us in wars guard us among our people.
हुवे वो देवीमदितिं नमोभिर्म्र्ळीकाय वरुणं मित्रमग्निम|	i call with prayers on aditi your goddess on agni mitra varuṇa for favour.
अभिक्षदामर्यमणं सुशेवं तरातॄन देवान सवितारं भगं च|	on aryaman who gives unasked the gracious on gods who save on savitar and bhaga.
सुज्योतिषः सूर्य दक्षपितॄननागास्त्वे सुमहो वीहि देवान|	visit to prove us free from sin o sūrya lord of great might the bright gods sprung from dakṣa.
दविजन्मानो य रतसापः सत्याः सवर्वन्तो यजता अग्निजिह्वाः|	twiceborn and true observing sacred duties holy and full of light whose tongue is agni.
उत दयावाप्र्थिवी कषत्रमुरु बर्हद रोदसी शरणं सुषुम्ने|	and o ye heaven and earth a wide dominion o ye most blissful worlds our lofty shelter.
महस करथो वरिवो यथा नोअस्मे कषयाय धिषणे अनेहः|	give ample room and freedom for our dwelling a home ye hemispheres which none may rival.
आ नो रुद्रस्य सूनवो नमन्तामद्या हूतासो वसवोअध्र्ष्टाः|	this day invited may the sons of rudra resistless excellent stoop down to meet us.
यदीमर्भे महति वा हितासो बाधे मरुतो अह्वाम देवान|	for when beset with slight or sore affliction we ever call upon the gods the maruts.
मिम्यक्ष येषु रोदसी नु देवी सिषक्ति पूषा अभ्यर्धयज्वा|	to whom the goddess rodasī clings closely whom pūṣan follows bringing ample bounty.
शरुत्वा हवं मरुतो यद ध याथ भूमा रेजन्ते अध्वनि परविक्ते|	what time ye hear our call and come o maruts upon your separate path all creatures tremble.
अभि तयं वीरं गिर्वणसमर्चेन्द्रं बरह्मणा जरितर्नवेन|	with a new hymn extol o thou who singest the lover of the song the hero indra.
शरवदिद धवमुप च सतवानो रासद वाजानुप महो गर्णानः|	may he exalted hear our invocation and grant us mighty wealth and strength when lauded.
ओमानमापो मानुषीरम्र्क्तं धात तोकाय तनयाय शंयोः|	give full protection friends of man ye waters in peace and trouble to our sons and grandsons.
यूयं हि षठा भिषजो मात्र्तमा विश्वस्य सथातुर्जगतो जनित्रीः|	for ye are our most motherly physicians parents of all that standeth all that moveth.
आ नो देवः सविता तरायमाणो हिरण्यपाणिर्यजतो जगम्यात|	may savitar come hither and approach us the god who rescues holy goldenhanded.
यो दत्रवानुषसो न परतीकं वयूर्णुते दाशुषे वार्याणि|	the god who bounteous as the face of morning discloses precious gifts for him who worships.
उत तवं सूनो सहसो नो अद्या देवानस्मिन्नध्वरे वव्र्त्याः|	and thou o son of strength do thou turn hither the gods today to this our holy service.
सयामहं ते सदमिद रातौ तव सयामग्नेअवसा सुवीरः|	may i for evermore enjoy thy bounty and agni by thy grace be rich in heroes.
उत तया मे हवमा जग्म्यातं नासत्या धीभिर्युवमङग विप्रा|	come also to my call o ye nāsatyas yea verily through my prayers ye holy sages.
अत्रिं न महस्तमसोअमुमुक्तं तूर्वतं नरा दुरितादभीके|	as from great darkness ye delivered atri protect us chiefs from danger in the conflict.
ते नो रायो दयुमतो वाजवतो दातारो भूत नर्वतः पुरुक्षोः|	o gods bestow upon us riches splendid with strength and heroes bringing food in plenty.
दशस्यन्तो दिव्याः पार्थिवासो गोजाता अप्या मर्लता चदेवाः|	be gracious helpful gods of earth of heaven born of the cow and dwellers in the waters.
ते नो रुद्रः सरस्वती सजोषा मीळ्हुष्मन्तो विष्णुर्म्र्ळन्तु वायुः|	may rudra and sarasvatī accordant viṣṇu and vāyu pour down gifts and bless us.
रभुक्षा वाजो दैव्यो विधाता पर्जन्यावाता पिप्यतामिषं नः|	Ṛbhukṣan vāja and divine vidhatar parjanya vāta make our food abundant.
उत सय देवः सविता भगो नोअपां नपादवतु दानु पप्रिः|	may this god savitar the lord the offspring of waters pouring down his dew be gracious.
तवष्टा देवेभिर्जनिभिः सजोषा दयौर्देवेभिः पर्थिवी समुद्रैः|	and with the gods and dames accordant tvaṣṭar dyaus with the gods and prthivi with oceans.
उत नोअहिर्बुध्न्यः शर्णोत्वज एकपात पर्थिवी समुद्रः|	may ajaekapād and ahibudhnya and earth and ocean hear our invocation.
विश्वे देवा रताव्र्धो हुवाना सतुता मन्त्राः कविशस्ता अवन्तु|	all gods who strengthen law invoked and lauded and holy texts uttered by sages help us.
एवा नपातो मम तस्य धीभिर्भरद्वाजा अभ्यर्चन्त्यर्कैः|	so with my thoughts and hymns of praise the children of bharadvāja sing aloud to please you.
गना हुतासो वसवोअध्र्ष्टा विश्वे सतुतासो भूता यजत्राः|	the dames invoked and the resistless vasus and all ye holy ones have been exalted.
तमु षटुहि यो अभिभूत्योजा वन्वन्नवातः पुरुहूत इन्द्रः|	glorify him whose might is allsurpassing indra the muchinvoked who fights uninjured.
अषाळ्हमुग्रं सहमानमाभिर्गीर्भिर्वर्ध वर्षभं चर्षणीनाम|	magnify with these songs the nevervanquished the strong the bull of men the mighty victor.
स युध्मः सत्वा खजक्र्त समद्वा तुविम्रक्षो नदनुमान रजीषी|	he champion hero warrior lord of battles impetuous loudly roaring great destroyer.
बर्हद्रेणुश्च्यवनो मानुषीणामेकः कर्ष्टीनामभवत सहावा|	who whirls the dust on high alone oerthrower hath made all races of mankind his subjects.
तवं ह नु तयददमायो दस्यून्रेकः कर्ष्टीरवनोरार्याय|	thou thou alone hast tamed the dasyus singly thou hast subdued the people for the Ārya.
अस्ति सविन नु वीर्यं तत त इन्द्र न सविदस्ति तद रतुथा वि वोचः|	in this or is it not thine hero exploit indra declare it at the proper season.
सदिद धि ते तुविजातस्य मन्ये सहः सहिष्ठ तुरतस्तुरस्य|	for true i deem thy strength is thine the mighty thine o most potent thine the conquering victor.
उग्रमुग्रस्य तवसस्तवीयोअरध्रस्य रध्रतुरो बभूव|	strong of the strong most mighty of the mighty thine driver of the churl to acts of bounty.
तन नः परत्नं सख्यमस्तु युष्मे इत्था वदद्भिर्वलमङगिरोभिः|	be this our ancient bond of friendship with you and with aṅgirases here who speak of vala.
हन्नच्युतच्युद दस्मेषयन्तं रणोः पुरो वि दुरोस्य विश्वाः|	thou wondrous shaker of things firm didst smite him in his fresh strength and force his doors and castles.
स हि धीभिर्हव्यो अस्त्युग्र ईशानक्र्न महति वर्त्रतूर्ये|	with holy thoughts must he be called the mighty showing his power in the great fight with vṛtra.
स तोकसाता तनये स वज्री वितन्तसाय्यो अभवत समत्सु|	he must be called to give us seed and offspring the thunderer must he moved and sped to battle.
स मज्मना जनिम मानुषाणाममर्त्येन नाम्नाति पर सर्स्रे|	he in his might with name that lives for ever hath far surpassed all human generations.
स दयुम्नेन स शवसोत राया स वीर्येण नर्तमः समोकाः|	he most heroic hath his home with splendour with glory and with riches and with valour.
स यो न मुहे न मिथू जनो भूत सुमन्तुनामा चुमुरिं धुनिं च|	stranger to guile who neer was false or faithless bearing a name that may be well remembered.
वर्णक पिप्रुं शम्बरं शुष्णमिन्द्रः पुरांच्यौत्नाय शयथाय नू चित|	indra crushed cumuri dhuni Śambara pipru and Śuṣṇa that their castles fell in ruin.
उदावता तवक्षसा पन्यसा च वर्त्रहत्याय रथमिन्द्र तिष्ठ|	with saving might that must be praised and lauded indra ascend thy car to smite down vṛtra.
धिष्व वज्रं हस्त आ दक्षिणत्राभि पर मन्द पुरुदत्र मायाः|	in thy right hand hold fast thy bolt of thunder and weaken bounteous lord his art and magic.
अग्निर्न शुष्कं वनमिन्द्र हेती रक्षो नि धक्ष्यशनिर्न भीमा|	as agni as the dart burns the dry forest like the dread shaft burn down the fiends o indra.
गम्भीरय रष्वया यो रुरोजाध्वानयद दुरिता दम्भयच्च|	thou who with high deepreaching spear hast broken hast covered over mischief and destroyed it.
आ सहस्रं पथिभिरिन्द्र राया तुविद्युम्न तुविवाजेभिरर्वाक|	with wealth by thousand paths come hither agni paths that bring ample strength o thou most splendid.
याहि सूनो सहसो यस्य नू चिददेव ईशे पुरुहूत योतोः|	come son of strength oer whom invoked of many the godless hath no power to keep thee distant.
पर तुविद्युम्नस्य सथविरस्य घर्ष्वेर्दिवो ररप्शे महिमा पर्थिव्याः|	from heaven from earth is bruited forth the greatness of him the firm the fiery the resplendent.
नास्य शत्रुर्न परतिमानमस्ति न परतिष्ठिःपुरुमायस्य सह्योः|	no foe hath he no counterpart no refuge is there from him the conqueror full of wisdom.
पर तत ते अद्या करणं कर्तं भूत कुत्सं यदायुमतिथिग्वमस्मै|	this day the deed that thou hast done is famous when thou for him with many thousand others.
पुरू सहस्रा नि शिशा अभि कषामुत तूर्वयाणं धर्षता निनेथ|	laidest low kutsa Āyu atithigva and boldly didst deliver tūrvayāṇa.
अनु तवाहिघ्ने अध देव देवा मदन विश्वे कवितमं कवीनाम|	in thee o god the wisest of the sages all gods were joyful when thou slewest ahi.
करो यत्र वरिवो बाधिताय दिवे जनाय तन्वे गर्णानः|	when lauded for thyself thou gavest freedom to soreafflicted heaven and to the people.
अनु दयावाप्र्थिवी तत त ओजोअमर्त्या जिहत इन्द्र देवाः|	this power of thine both heaven and earth acknowledge the deathless gods acknowledge it o indra.
कर्ष्वा कर्त्नो अक्र्तं यत ते अस्त्युक्थं नवीयो जनयस्व यज्ञैः|	do what thou neer hast done o mighty worker beget a new hymn at thy sacrifices.
तवद विश्वा सुभग सौभगान्यग्ने वि यन्ति वनिनो न वयाः|	from thee as branches from a tree o agni from thee auspicious god spring all our blessings.
शरुष्टी रयिर्वाजो वर्त्रतूर्ये दिवो वर्ष्टिरीड्यो रीतिरपाम|	wealth swiftly strength in battle with our foemen the rain besought of heaven the flow of waters.
तवं भगो न आ हि रत्नमिषे परिज्मेव कषयसि दस्मवर्चाः|	thou art our bhaga to send wealth thou dwellest like circumambient air with wondrous splendour.
अग्ने मित्रो न बर्हत रतस्यासि कषत्ता वामस्य देव भूरेः|	friend art thou of the lofty law like mitra controller agni god of many a blessing.
स सत्पतिः शवसा हन्ति वर्त्रमग्ने विप्रो वि पणेर्भर्तिवाजम|	agni the hero slays with might his foeman the singer bears away the paṇis booty.
यं तवं परचेत रतजात राया सजोषा नप्त्रापां हिनोषि|	even he whom thou sage born in law incitest by wealth accordant with the child of waters.
यस्ते सूनो सहसो गीर्भिरुक्थैर्यज्ञैर्मर्तो निशितिं वेद्यानट|	the man who son of strength  with sacrifices hymns lauds attracts thy fervour to the altar.
विश्वं स देव परति वारमग्ने धत्ते धान्यं पत्यते वसव्यैः|	enjoys each precious thing o god o agni gains wealth of corn and is the lord of treasures.
ता नर्भ्य आ सौश्रवसा सुवीराग्ने सूनो सहसः पुष्यसेधाः|	grant son of strength to men for their subsistence such things as bring high fame and hero children.
कर्णोषि यच्छवसा भूरि पश्वो वयो वर्कायारयेजसुरये|	for thou with might givest much food in cattle even to the wicked wolf when he is hungry.
वद्मा सूनो सहसो नो विहाया अग्ने तोकं तनयं वाजि नो दाः|	eloquent son of strength most mighty agni vouchsafe us seed and offspring full of vigour.
विश्वाभिर्गीर्भिरभि पूर्तिमश्यां मदेम शतहिमाः सुवीराः|	may i by all my songs obtain abundance may brave sons gladden us through a hundred winters.
सोमारुद्रा धारयेथामसुर्यं पर वामिष्टयोअरमश्नुवन्तु|	hold fast your godlike sway o somarudra let these our sacrifices quickly reach you.
दमेदमे सप्त रत्ना दधाना शं नो भूतं दविपदेशं चतुष्पदे|	placing in every house your seven great treasures bring blessing to our quadrupeds and bipeds.
सोमारुद्रा वि वर्हतं विषूचीममीवा या नो गयमाविवेश|	soma and rudra chase to every quarter the sickness that hath visited our dwelling.
आरे बाधेथां निरतिं पराचैरस्मे भद्रा सौश्रवसानि सन्तु|	drive nirrti away into the distance and give us excellent and happy glories.
सोमारुद्रा युवमेतान्यस्मे विश्वा तनूषु भेषजानि धत्तम|	provide o somarudra for our bodies all needful medicines to heal and cure us.
अव सयतं मुञ्चतं यन नो अस्ति तनूषु बद्धं कर्तमेनो अस्मत|	set free and draw away the sin committed which we have still inherent in our persons.
तिग्मायुधौ तिग्महेती सुशेवौ सोमारुद्राविह सु मर्ळतं नः|	armed with keen shafts and weapons kind and loving be gracious unto us soma and rudra.
पर नो मुञ्चतं वरुणस्य पाशाद गोपायतं नः सुमनस्यमाना|	release us from the noose of varuṇa keep us from sorrow in your tender lovingkindness.
सत्रा मदासस्तव विश्वजन्याः सत्रा रायोअध ये पार्थिवासः|	thy raptures ever were for all mens profit so evermore have been thine earthly riches.
सत्रा वाजानामभवो विभक्ता यद देवेषु धारयथा असुर्यम|	thou still hast been the dealerforth of vigour since among gods thou hast had power and godhead.
अनु पर येजे जन ओजो अस्य सत्रा दधिरे अनु वीर्याय|	men have obtained his strength by sacrificing and ever urged him on to hero valour.
सयूमग्र्भे दुधयेअर्वते च करतुं वर्ञ्जन्त्यपि वर्त्रहत्ये|	for the reinseizing the impetuous charger they furnished power even for vṛtras slaughter.
तं सध्रीचीरूतयो वर्ष्ण्यानि पौंस्यानि नियुतः सश्चुरिन्द्रम|	associate with him as teams of horses help manly might and vigour follow indra.
समुद्रं न सिन्धव उक्थशुष्मा उरुव्यचसं गिरा विशन्ति|	as rivers reach the sea so strong with praises our holy songs reach him the comprehensive.
स रायस खामुप सर्जा गर्णानः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य तवमिन्द्रवस्वः|	lauded by us let flow the spring o indra of excellent and brightlyshining riches.
पतिर्बभूथासमो जनानामेको विश्वस्य भुवनस्य राजा|	for thou art lord of men without an equal of all the world thou art the only sovran.
स तु शरुधि शरुत्या यो दुवोयुर्द्यौर्न भूमाभि रायोर्यः|	hear what thou mayst hear thou who fain for worship as heaven girds earth guardest thy servants treasure.
असो यथा नः शवसा चकानो युगेयुगे वयसा चेकितानः|	tlat thou mayst be our own joying in power famed through thy might in every generation.
य एनमादिदेशति करम्भादिति पूषणम|	whoso remembers pūṣan as cater of mingled curd and meal.
न तेन देव आदिशे|	need think no more upon the god.
उत घा स रथीतमः सख्या सत्पतिर्युजा|	and he is best of charioteers indra the heros lord allied.
इन्द्रो वर्त्राणि जिघ्नते|	with him as friend destroys the foes.
उतादः परुषे गवि सूरश्चक्रं हिरण्ययम|	and there the best of charioteers hath guided through the speckled cloud.
नयैरयद्रथीतमः|	the golden wheel of sūras car.
यदद्य तवा पुरुष्टुत बरवाम दस्र मन्तुमः|	whateer we speak this day to thee wise wondrous god whom many praise.
तत सु नो मन्म साधय|	give thou fulfilment of our thought.
इमं च नो गवेषणं सातये सीषधो गणम|	lead on this company of ours that longs for kine to win the spoil.
आरात पूषन्नसि शरुतः|	thou pūṣan art renowned afar.
आ ते सवस्तिमीमह आरेघामुपावसुम|	prosperity we crave from thee afar from sin and near to wealth.
अद्या च सर्वतातये शवश्च सर्वतातये|	tending to perfect happiness both for to morrow and today.
मन्द्रस्य कवेर्दिव्यस्य वह्नेर्विप्रमन्मनो वचनस्य मध्वः|	of this our charming our celestial soma eloquent wise priest with inspired devotion.
अपा नस्तस्य सचनस्य देवेषो युवस्व गर्णते गोग्राः|	of this thy close attendant hast thou drunken god send the singer food with milk to grace it.
अयमुशानः पर्यद्रिमुस्र रतधीतिभिर्र्तयुग युजानः|	craving the kine rushing against the mountain led on by law with holyminded comrades.
रुजदरुग्णं वि वलस्य सानुं पणीन्र्वचोभिरभि योधदिन्द्रः|	he broke the neverbroken ridge of vala with words of might indra subdued the paṇis.
अयं दयोतयदद्युतो वयक्तून दोषा वस्तोः शरद इन्दुरिन्द्र|	this indu lighted darksome nights o indra throughout the years at morning and at evening.
इमं केतुमदधुर्नू चिदह्नां शुचिजन्मन उषसश्चकार|	him have they stablished as the days bright ensign he made the mornings to be born in splendour.
अयं रोचयदरुचो रुचानोअयं वासयद वय रतेन पूर्वीः|	he shone and caused to shme the worlds that shone not by law he lighted up the host of mornings.
अयमीयत रतयुग्भिरश्वैः सवर्विदा नाभिना चर्षणिप्राः|	he moves with steeds yoked by eternal order contenting men with nave that finds the sunlight.
नू गर्णानो गर्णते परत्न राजन्निषः पिन्व वसुदेयाय पूर्वीः|	now praised o ancient king fill thou the singer with plenteous food that he may deal forth treasures.
अप ओषधीरविषा वनानि गा अर्वतो नॄन रचसे रिरीहि|	give waters herbs that have no poison forests and kine and steeds and men to him who lauds thee.
अपादित उदु नश्चित्रतमो महीं भर्षद दयुमतीमिन्द्रहूतिम|	he hath drunk hence most marvellous and carried away our great and splendid call on indra.
पन्यसीं धीतिं दैव्यस्य यामञ जनस्य रातिं वनते सुदानुः|	the bounteous when we serve the gods accepteth song yet more famous and the gifts we bring him.
दूराच्चिदा वसतो अस्य कर्णा घोषादिन्द्रस्य तन्यति बरुवाणः|	the speaker filleth with a cry to indra his ears who cometh nigh een from a distance.
एयमेनं देवहूतिर्वव्र्त्यान मद्र्यगिन्द्रमियं रच्यमाना|	may this my call bring indra to my presence this call to gods composed in sacred verses.
तं वो धिया परमया पुराजामजरमिन्द्रमभ्यनूष्यर्कैः|	him have i sung with my best song and praises indra of ancient birth and everlasting.
बरह्मा च गिरो दधिरे समस्मिन महांश्च सतोमो अधि वर्धदिन्द्रे|	for prayer and songs in him are concentrated let laud wax mighty when addressed to indra.
वर्धाद यं यज्ञ उत सोम इन्द्रं वर्धाद बरह्म गिर उक्था च मन्म|	indra whom sacrifice shall strengthen soma and song and hymn and praises and devotion.
वर्धाहैनमुषसो यामन्नक्तोर्वर्धान मासाः शरदो दयाव इन्द्रम|	whom dawns shall strengthen when the night departeth indra whom days shall strengthen months and autumns.
एवा जज्ञानं सहसे असामि वाव्र्धानं राधसे च शरुताय|	him born for conquering might in full perfection and waxen strongfor bounty and for glory.
महामुग्रमवसे विप्र नूनमा विवासेम वर्त्रतूर्येषु|	great powerful will we today o singer invite to aid us and to quell our foemen.
तवं हयग्ने परथमो मनोतास्या धियो अभवो दस्म होता|	thou first inventor of this prayer o agni worker of marvels hast become our herald.
तवं सीं वर्षन्नक्र्णोर्दुष्टरीतु सहो विश्वस्मै सहसे सहध्यै|	thou bull hast made us strength which none may conquer strength that shall overcome all other prowess.
अधा होता नयसीदो यजीयानिळस पद इषयन्नीड्यः सन|	as priest thou sattest at the seat of worship furthering us best offerer meet for honour.
तं तवा नरः परथमं देवयन्तो महो राये चितयन्तो अनु गमन|	so first to thee have pious men resorted turning thy mind to thoughts of ample riches.
वर्तेव यन्तं बहुभिर्वसव्यैस्त्वे रयिं जाग्र्वांसो अनु गमन|	in thee still watching they have followed riches who goest with much wealth as with an army.
रुशन्तमग्निं दर्शतं बर्हन्तं वपावन्तं विश्वहा दीदिवांसम|	the radiant agni lofty fair to look on worshipped with marrow evermore resplendent.
पदं देवस्य नमसा वयन्तः शरवस्यवः शरव आपन्नम्र्क्तम|	they who approached the gods abode with homage eager for glory won them perfect glory.
नामानि चिद दधिरे यज्ञियानि भद्रायां ते रणयन्तसन्द्र्ष्टौ|	yea they gained even sacrificial titles and found delight in thine auspicious aspect.
तवां वर्धन्ति कषितयः पर्थिव्यां तवां राय उभयासो जनानाम|	on earth the people magnify thee greatly thee their celestial and terrestrial riches.
तवं तराता तरणे चेत्यो भूः पिता माता सदमिन मानुषाणाम|	thou helper must be known as our preserver father and mother of mankind for ever.
सपर्येण्यः स परियो विक्ष्वग्निर्होता मन्द्रो नि षसादा यजीयान|	dear priest among mankind adorable agni hath seated him joygiver skilled in worship.
तं तवा वयं दम आ दीदिवांसमुप जञुबाधो नमसा सदेम|	let us approach thee shining in thy dwelling kneeling upon our knees with adoration.
तं तवा वयं सुध्यो नव्यमग्नेसुम्नायव ईमहे देवयन्तः|	longing for bliss pureminded goddevoted agni we seek thee such meet to be lauded.
तवं विशो अनयो दीद्यानो दिवो अग्ने बर्हता रोचनेन|	thou agni leddest forth our men to battle refulgent with the heavens exalted splendour.
विशां कविं विश्पतिं शश्वतीनां नितोशनं वर्षभं चर्षणीनाम|	sage of mankind all peoples lord and master the bull of men the sender down of blessings.
परेतीषणिमिषयन्तं पावकं राजन्तमग्निं यजतं रयीणाम|	still pressing on promoting purifying agni the holy one the lord of riches.
सो अग्न ईजे शशमे च मर्तो यस्त आनट समिधा हव्यदातिम|	agni the mortal who hath toiled and worshipped brought thee oblations with his kindled fuel.
य आहुतिं परि वेदा नमोभिर्विश्वेत स वामा दधतेत्वोतः|	and well knows sacrifice with adoration gains every joy with thee to guard and help him.
अस्मा उ ते महि महे विधेम नमोभिरग्ने समिधोत हव्यैः|	mightily let us worship thee the mighty with reverence agni fuel and oblations.
वेदी सूनो सहसो गीर्भिरुक्थैरा ते भद्रायां सुमतौयतेम|	with songs o son of strength with hymns with altar so may we strive for thine auspicious favour.
आ यस्ततन्थ रोदसी वि भासा शरवोभिश्च शरवस्यस्तरुत्रः|	thou who hast covered heaven and earth with splendour and with thy glories glorious and triumphant.
बर्हद्भिर्वाजै सथविरेभिरस्मे रेवद्भिरग्ने वितरं वि भाहि|	continue thou to shine on us o agni with strength abundant rich and long enduring.
नर्वद वसो सदमिद धेह्यस्मे भूरि तोकाय तनयाय पश्वः|	vouchsafe us ever as man needs o vasu abundant wealth of kine for son and offspring.
पूर्वीरिषो बर्हतीरारेघा अस्मे भद्रा सौश्रवसानि सन्तु|	food noble plenteous far from sin and evil he with us and fair fame to make us happy.
पुरूण्यग्ने पुरुधा तवाया वसूनि राजन वसुता ते अश्याम|	may i obtain much wealth in many places by love of thee and through thy grace king agni.
पुरूणि हि तवे पुरुवार सन्त्यग्ने वसु विधते राजनि तवे|	for in thee bounteous one in thee the sovran agni are many boons for him who serves thee.
यथा होतर्मनुषो देवताता यज्ञेभिः सूनो सहसो यजासि|	as at mans service of the gods invoker thou son of strength dost sacrifice and worship.
एवा नो अद्य समना समानानुशन्नग्न उशतो यक्षि देवान|	so bring for us today all gods together bring willingly the willing gods o agni.
स नो विभावा चक्षणिर्न वस्तोरग्निर्वन्दारु वेद्यश्चनो धात|	may agni radiant herald of the morning meet to be known accept our praise with favour.
विश्वायुर्यो अम्र्तो मर्त्येषूषर्भुद भूदतिथिर्जातवेदाः|	dear to all life mid mortal men immortal our guest awake at dawn is jātavedas.
दयावो न यस्य पनयन्त्यभ्वं भासांसि वस्ते सूर्यो न शुक्रः|	whose might the very heavens regard with wonder bright as the sun he clothes himself with lustre.
वि य इनोत्यजरः पावकोअश्नस्य चिच्छिश्नथत पूर्व्याणि|	he who sends forth eternal purifier hath shattered een the ancient works of aśna.
वद्मा हि सूनो अस्यद्मसद्वा चक्रे अग्निर्जनुषाज्मान्नम|	thou art a singer son our feastcompanion agni at birth prepared his food and pathway.
स तवं न ऊर्जसन ऊर्जं धा राजेव जेरव्र्के कषेष्यन्तः|	therefore vouchsafe us strength o strengthbestower win like a king foes trouble not thy dwelling.
नितिक्ति यो वारणमन्नमत्ति वायुर्न राष्ट्र्यत्येत्यक्तून|	even he who cats his firm hard food with swiftnessand overtakes the nights as vāyu kingdoms.
तुर्याम यस्त आदिशामरातीरत्यो न हरुतः पततः परिह्रुत|	may we oercome those who resist thine orders like a steed casting down the flying foemen.
आ सूर्यो न भानुमद्भिरर्कैरग्ने ततन्थ रोदसी वि भासा|	like sūrya with his fulgent rays o agni thou overspreadest both the worlds with splendour.
चित्रो नयत परि तमांस्यक्तः शोचिषा पत्मन्नौशिजो न दीयन|	decked with bright colour he dispels the darkness like auśija with clear flame swifily flying.
तवां हि मन्द्रतममर्कशोकैर्वव्र्महे महि नः शरोष्यग्ने|	we have elected thee as most delightful for thy beams glow hear our great laud o agni.
इन्द्रं न तवा शवसा देवता वायुं पर्णन्ति राधसान्र्तमाः|	the best men praise thee as the peer of indra in strength mid gods like viyu in thy bounty.
नू नो अग्नेअव्र्केभिः सवस्ति वेषि रायः पथिभिः पर्ष्यंहः|	now agni on the tranquil paths of riches come to us for our weal save us from sorrow.
ता सूरिभ्यो गर्णते रासि सुम्नं मदेम शतहिमाःसुवीराः|	grant chiefs and bard this boon may we live happy with hero children through a hundred winters.
य आनयत परावतः सुनीती तुर्वशं यदुम|	that indra is our youthful friend who with his trusty guidance led.
इन्द्रः सनो युवा सखा|	turvaśa yadu from afar.
अविप्रे चिद वयो दधदनाशुना चिदर्वता|	even to the dull and uninspired indra gives vital power and wins.
इन्द्रो जेता हितं धनम|	even with slow steed the offered prize.
महीरस्य परणीतयः पूर्वीरुत परशस्तयः|	great are his ways of guiding us andṅanilbld are ins eulogies.
नास्य कषीयन्त ऊतयः|	his kind protections never fail.
सखायो बरह्मवाहसेअर्चत पर च गायत|	friends sing your psalm and offer praise to him to whom the prayer is brought.
स हि नः परमतिर्मही|	for our great providence is he.
तवमेकस्य वर्त्रहन्नविता दवयोरसि|	thou slaughterer of vṛtra art guardian and friend of one and two.
उतेद्र्शे यथा वयम|	yea of a man like one of us.
नयसीद वति दविषः कर्णोष्युक्थशंसिनः|	beyond mens hate thou leadest us and givest cause to sing thy praise.
नर्भिः सुवीर उच्यसे|	good hero art thou called by men.
बरह्माणं बरह्मवाहसं गीर्भिः सखायं रग्मियम|	i call with hymns as twere a cow to milk the friend who merits praise.
गांन दोहसे हुवे|	the brahman who accepts the prayer.
यस्य विश्वानि हस्तयोरूचुर्वसूनि नि दविता|	him in whose hands they say are stored all treasures from the days of old.
वीरस्य पर्तनाषहः|	the hero conquering in the fight.
वि दर्ळ्हानि चिदद्रिवो जनानां शचीपते|	lord of strength caster of the stone destroy the firm forts built by men.
वर्ह माया अनानत|	and foil their arts unbending god.
तमु तवा सत्य सोमपा इन्द्र वाजानां पते|	thee thee as such o lord of power o indra somadrinker true.
अहूमहि शरवस्यवः|	we fain for glory have invoked.
तमु तवा यः पुरासिथ यो वा नूनं हिते धने|	such as thou wast of old and art now to be called on when the prize.
हव्यःस शरुधी हवम|	lies ready listen to our call.
धीभिरर्वद्भिरर्वतो वाजानिन्द्र शरवाय्यान|	with hymns and coursers we will gain indra through thee both steeds and spoil.
तवया जेष्म हितं धनम|	most glorious and the proffered prize.
अभूरु वीर गिर्वणो महानिन्द्र धने हिते|	thou indra lover of the song whom men must stir to help hast been.
भरे वितन्तसाय्यः|	great in the contest for the prize.
या त ऊतिरमित्रहन मक्षूजवस्तमासति|	slayer of foes whatever aid of thine imparts the swiftest course.
तया नो हिनुही रथम|	with that impel our car to speed.
स रथेन रथीतमोअस्माकेनाभियुग्वना|	as skilfullest of those who drive the chariot with our art and aim.
जेषि जिष्णो हितं धनम|	o conqueror win the proffered prize.
य एक इत तमु षटुहि कर्ष्टीनां विचर्षणिः|	praise him who matchless and alone was born the lord of living men.
पतिर्जज्ञे वर्षक्रतुः|	most active with heroic soul.
यो गर्णतामिदासिथापिरूती शिवः सखा|	thou who hast been the singers friend a friend auspicious with thine aid.
स तवंन इन्द्र मर्ळय|	as such o indra favour us.
धिष्व वज्रं गभस्त्यो रक्षोहत्याय वज्रिवः|	grasp in thine arms the thunderbolt o thunderarmed to slay the fiends.
सासहीष्ठा अभि सप्र्धः|	mayst thou subdue the foemens host.
परत्नं रयीणां युजं सखायं कीरिचोदनम|	i call the ancient friend allied with wealth who speeds the lowly man.
बरह्मवाहस्तमं हुवे|	him to whom chiefly prayer is brought.
स हि विश्वानि पार्थिवानेको वसूनि पत्यते|	for he alone is lord of all the treasures of the earth he speeds.
गिर्वणस्तमो अध्रिगुः|	hither chief lover of the song.
स नो नियुद्भिरा पर्ण कामं वाजेभिरश्विभिः|	so with thy yoked teams satisfy our wish with power and wealth in steeds.
गोमद्भिर्गोपते धर्षत|	and cattle boldly lord of kine.
तद वो गाय सुते सचा पुरुहूताय सत्वने|	sing this what time the  juice is pressed to him your hero muchinvoked.
शं यद गवे|	to please him as a mighty steer.
न शाकिने|	he excellent withholdeth not his gift of power and wealth in kine.
न घा वसुर्नि यमते दानं वाजस्य गोमतः|	when he hath listened to our songs.
यत सीमुप शरवद गिरः|	may he with might unclose for us the cows stall whosesoeer it be.
कुवित्सस्य पर हि वरजं गोमन्तं दस्युहा गमत|	to which the dasyuslayer goes.
शचीभिरप नो वरत|	o indra Śatakratu these our songs have called aloud to thee.
इमा उ तवा शतक्रतोअभि पर णोनुवुर्गिरः|	like mother cows to meet their calves.
इन्द्र वत्संन मातरः|	hard is thy love to win thou art a steer to him who longs for steers.
दूणाशं सख्यं तव गौरसि वीर गव्यते|	be to one craving steeds a steed.
अश्वो अश्वायते भव|	delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own great munificence.
स मन्दस्वा हयन्धसो|	yield not thy singer to reproach.
इमा उ तवा सुतेसुते नक्षन्ते गिर्वणो गिरः|	these songs with every draught we pour come lover of the song to thee.
वत्सं गावोन धेनवः|	as milchkine hasten to their young.
पुरूतमं पुरूणां सतोतॄणां विवाचि|	to thee most oft invoked amid the many singers rivalry.
वाजेभिर्वाजयताम|	who beg with all their might for wealth.
अस्माकमिन्द्र भूतु ते सतोमो वाहिष्ठो अन्तमः|	nearest and most attractive may our laud o indra come to thee.
अस्मान राये महे हिनु|	urge thou us on to ample wealth.
अधि बर्बुः पणीनां वर्षिष्ठे मूर्धन्नस्थात|	brbu hath set himself above the paṇis oer their highest head.
उरुः कक्षो न गाङगयः|	like the wide bush on gangās bank.
यस्य वायोरिव दरवद भद्रा रातिः सहस्रिणी|	he whose good bounty thousandfold swift as the rushing of the wind.
सद्यो दानाय मंहते|	suddenly offers as a gift.
तत सु नो विश्वे अर्य आ सदा गर्णन्ति कारवः|	so all our singers ever praise the pious brbus noble deed.
बर्बुं सहस्रदातमं सूरिं सहस्रसातमम|	chief best to give his thousands best to give a thousand liberal gifts.
परत्यस्मै पिपीषते विश्वानि विदुषे भर|	bring sacrificial gifts to him omniscient for he longs to drink.
अरंगमाय जग्मयेअपश्चाद्दघ्वने नरे|	the wanderer who comes with speed the hero ever in the van.
एमेनं परत्येतन सोमेभिः सोमपातमम|	with soma go ye nigh to him chief drinker of the somas juice.
अमत्रेभिर्र्जीषिणमिन्द्रं सुतेभिरिन्दुभिः|	with beakers to the impetuous god to indra with the drops effused.
यदी सुतेभिरिन्दुभिः सोमेभिः परतिभूषथ|	what time with soma with the juice effused ye come before the god.
वेदा विश्वस्य मेधिरो धर्षत तंतमिदेषते|	full wise he knows the hope of each and bold one strikes this foe and that.
अस्माअस्मा इदन्धसोअध्वर्यो पर भरा सुतम|	to him adhvaryu yea to him give offerings of the juice expressed.
कुवित समस्य जेन्यस्य शर्धतोअभिशस्तेरवस्परत|	will he not keep us safely from the spiteful curse of each presumptuous highborn foe.
सं पूषन विदुषा नय यो अञ्जसानुशासति|	o pusan bring us to the man who knows who shall direct us straight.
य एवेदमिति बरवत|	and say unto us it is here.
समु पूष्णा गमेमहि यो गर्हानभिशासति|	may we go forth with pūṣan who shall point the houses out to us.
इम एवेति चब्रवत|	and say to us these same are they.
पूष्णश्चक्रं न रिष्यति न कोशोअव पद्यते|	unharmed is pūṣans chariot wheel the box neer falleth to the ground.
नो अस्य वयथते पविः|	nor doth the loosened feliy shake.
यो अस्मै हविषाविधन न तं पूषापि मर्ष्यते|	pūṣan forgetteth not the man who serveth him with offered gift.
परथमो विदते वसु|	that man is first to gather wealth.
पूषा गा अन्वेतु नः पुषा रक्षत्वर्वतः|	may pūṣan follow near our kine may pūṣan keep our horses safe.
पूषा वाजं सनोतु नः|	may pūṣan gather gear for us.
पूषन्ननु पर गा इहि यजमानस्य सुन्वतः|	follow the kine of him who pours libations out and worships thee.
अस्माकं सतुवतामुत|	and ours who sing thee songs of praise.
माकिर्नेशन माकीं रिषन माकीं सं शारि केवटे|	let none be lost none injured none sink in a pit and break a limb.
अथारिष्टाभिरा गहि|	return with these all safe and sound.
शर्ण्वन्तं पूषणं वयमिर्यमनष्टवेदसम|	pūṣan who listens to our prayers the strong whose wealth is never lost.
ईशानंराय ईमहे|	the lord of riches we implore.
पूषन तव वरते वयं न रिष्येम कदा चन|	secure in thy protecting care o pūṣan never may we fail.
सतोतारस्त इह समसि|	we here are they who sing thy praise.
परि पूषा परस्ताद धस्तं दधातु दक्षिणम|	from out the distance far and wide may pūṣan stretch his right hand forth.
पुनर्नो नष्टमाजतु|	and drive our lost again to us.
कदा भुवन रथक्षयाणि बरह्म कदा सतोत्रे सहस्रपोष्यन्दाः|	when shall our prayers rest in thy car beside thee when dost thou give the singer food for thousands.
कदा सतोमं वासयोअस्य राया कदा धियः करसि वाजरत्नाः|	when wilt thou clothe this poets laud with plenty and when wilt thou enrich our hymns with booty.
कर्हि सवित तदिन्द्र यन नर्भिर्नॄन वीरैर्वीरान नीळयासे जयाजीन|	when wilt thou gatber men with men o indra heroes with heroes and prevail in combat.
तरिधातु गा अधि जयासि गोष्विन्द्र दयुम्नंस्वर्वद धेह्यस्मे|	thou shalt win triply kine in frays for cattle so indra give thou us celestial glory.
कर्हि सवित तदिन्द्र यज्जरित्रे विष्वप्सु बरह्म कर्णवः शविष्ठ|	yea when wilt thou o indra thou most mighty make the prayer allsustaining for the singer.
कदा धियो न नियुतो युवासे कदा गोमघा हवनानि गछाः|	when wilt thou yoke as we yoke songs thy horses and come to offerings that bring wealth in cattle.
स गोमघा जरित्रे अश्वश्चन्द्रा वाजश्रवसो अधि धेहि पर्क्षः|	grant to the singer food with store of cattle splendid with horses and the fame of riches.
पीपिहीषः सुदुघामिन्द्र धेनुं भरद्वाजेषु सुरुचो रुरुच्याः|	send food to swell the milchcow good at milking bright be its shine among the bharadvājas.
तमा नूनं वर्जनमन्यथा चिच्छूरो यच्छक्र वि दुरोग्र्णीषे|	lead otherwise this present foeman Śakra hence art thou praised as hero foe destroyer.
मा निररं शुक्रदुघस्य धेनोराङगिरसान बरह्मणा विप्र जिन्व|	him who gives pure gifts may i praise unceasing sage quicken the aṅgirases by devotion.
सवादुष किलायं मधुमानुतायं तीव्रः किलायं रसवानुतायम|	yea this is good to taste and full of sweetness verily it is strong and rich in flavour.
उतो नवस्य पपिवांसमिन्द्रं न कश्चनसहत आहवेषु|	no one may conquer indra in the battle when he hath drunken of the draught we offer.
अयं सवादुरिह मदिष्ठ आस यस्येन्द्रो वर्त्रहत्ये ममाद|	this sweet juice here had mightiest power to gladden it boldened indra when he siaughtered vṛtra.
पुरूणि यश्च्यौत्ना शम्बरस्य वि नवतिं नव च देह्यो हन|	when he defeated Śambaras many onslaughts and battered down his nineand ninety ramparts.
अयं मे पीत उदियर्ति वचमयं मनीषामुशतीमजीगः|	this stirreth up my voice when i have drunk it this hath aroused from sleep my yearning spirit.
अयं षळ उर्वीरमिमीत धीरो न याभ्यो भुवनं कच्चनारे|	this sage hath measured out the six expanses from which no single creature is excluded.
अयं स यो वरिमाणं पर्थिव्या वर्ष्माणं दिवो अक्र्णोदयं सः|	this even this is he who hath created the breadth of earth the lofty height of heaven.
अयं पीयूषं तिस्र्षु परवत्सु सोमो दाधारोर्वन्तरिक्षम|	he formed the nectar in three headlong rivers soma supports the wide midair above us.
अयं विदच्चित्रद्र्शीकमर्णः शुक्रसद्मनामुषसामनीके|	he found the wavy sea of brilliant colours in forefront of the dawns who dwell in brightness.
अयं महान महता सकम्भनेनोद दयामस्तभ्नाद वर्षभोमरुत्वान|	this mighty one the steer begirt by maruts hath propped the heavens up with a mighty pillar.
धर्षत पिब कलशे सोममिन्द्र वर्त्रहा शूर समरे वसूनाम|	drink soma boldly from the beaker indra in war for treasures hero vṛtraslayer.
माध्यन्दिने सवन आ वर्षस्व रयिस्थानो रयिमस्मासु धेहि|	fill thyself full at the midday libation and give us wealth thou treasury of riches.
इन्द्र पर णः पुरेतेव पश्य पर नो नय परतरं वस्यो अछ|	look out for us o indra as our leader and guide us on to gain yet goodlier treasure.
भवा सुपारो अतिपारयो नो भवा सुनीतिरुत वामनीतिः|	excellent guardian bear us well through peril and lead us on to wealth with careful guidance.
उरुं नो लोकमनु नेषि विद्वान सवर्वज्ज्योतिरभयं सवस्ति|	lead us to ample room o thou who knowest to happiness security and sunlight.
रष्वा त इन्द्र सथविरस्य बाहू उप सथेयाम शरणा बर्हन्ता|	high indra are the arms of thee the mighty may we betake us to their lofty shelter.
वरिष्ठे न इन्द्र वन्धुरे धा वहिष्ठयोः शतावन्नश्वयोरा|	set us on widest chariotseat o indra with two steeds best to draw o lord of hundreds.
इषमा वक्षीषां वर्षिष्ठां मा नस्तारीन मघवन रायो अर्यः|	bring us the best among all sorts of viands let not the foes wealth maghavan subdue us.
इन्द्र मर्ळ मह्यं जीवातुमिछ चोदय धियमयसो न धाराम|	be gracious indra let my days be lengthened sharpen my thought as twere a blade of iron.
यत किं चाहं तवायुरिदं वदामि तज्जुषस्व कर्धि मा देववन्तम|	approve whatever words i speak dependent on thee and grant me thy divine protection.
तरातारमिन्द्रमवितारमिन्द्रं हवेहवे सुहवं शूरमिन्द्रम|	indra the rescuer indra the helper hero who listens at each invocation.
हवयामि शक्रं पुरुहूतमिन्द्रं सवस्ति नो मघवाधात्विन्द्रः|	Śakra i call indra invoked of many may indra maghavan prosper and bless us.
इन्द्रः सुत्रामा सववानवोभिः सुम्र्ळीको भवतु विश्ववेदाः|	may helpful indra as our good protector lord of all treasures favour us with succour.
बाधतां दवेषो अभयं कर्णोतु सुवीर्यस्य पतयः सयाम|	baffle our foes and give us rest and safety and may we be the lords of hero vigour.
तस्य वयं सुमतौ यज्ञियस्यापि भद्रे सौमनसे सयाम|	may we enjoy the grace of him the holy yea may we dwell in his auspicious favour.
स सुत्रामा सववानिन्द्रो अस्मे आराच्चिद दवेषः सनुतर्युयोतु|	may helpful indra as our good preserver drive from us even from afar our foemen.
अव तवे इन्द्र परवतो नोर्मिर्गिरो बरह्माणि नियुतो धवन्ते|	like rivers rushing down a slope o indra to thee haste songs and prayers and linked verses.
उरू न राधः सवना पुरूण्यपो गा वज्रिन युवसे समिन्दून|	thou gatherest thunderer like widespread bounty kine water drops and manifold libations.
क ईं सतवत कः पर्णात को यजाते यदुग्रमिन मघवा विश्वहावेत|	who lauds him satisfies him pays him worship een the rich noble still hath found him mighty.
पादाविव परहरन्नन्यमअन्यं कर्णोति पूर्वमपरं शचीभिः|	with power as when one moves his feet alternate he makes the last precede the foremost follow.
शर्ण्वे वीर उग्रमउग्रं दमायन्नन्यम अन्यमतिनेनीयमानः|	famed is the hero as each strong mans tamer ever advancing one and then another.
एधमानद्विळ उभयस्य राजा चोष्कूयते विश इन्द्रो मनुष्यान|	king of both worlds hating the high and haughty indra protects the men who are his people.
परा पूर्वेषां सख्या वर्णक्ति वितर्तुराणो अपरेभिरेति|	he loves no more the men he loved aforetime he turns and moves away allied with others.
अनानुभूतीरवधून्वानः पूर्वीरिन्द्रः शरदस्तर्तरीति|	rejecting those who disregard his worship indra victorious lives through many autumns.
रूपंरूपं परतिरूपो बभूव तदस्य रूपं परतिचक्षणाय|	in every figure he hath been the mode this is his only form for us to look on.
इन्द्रो मायाभिः पुरुरूप ईयते युक्ता हयस्य हरयःशता दश|	indra moves multiform by his illusions for his bay steeds are yoked ten times a hundred.
युजानो हरिता रथे भूरि तवष्टेह राजति|	here tvaṣṭar yoking to the car the bay steeds hath extended sway.
को विश्वाहा दविषतः पक्ष आसत उतासीनेषु सूरिषु|	who will for ever stand upon the foemans side even when our princes sit at ease.
अगव्यूति कषेत्रमागम्न देवा उर्वी सती भूमिरंहूरणाभूत|	gods we have reached a country void of pasture the land though spacious was too small to hold us.
बर्हस्पते पर चिकित्सा गविष्टावित्था सते जरित्रैन्द्र पन्थाम|	bṛhaspati provide in war for cattle find a path indra for this faithful singer.
दिवेदिवे सद्र्शीरन्यमर्धं कर्ष्णा असेधतप सद्मनोजाः|	day after day far from their seat he drove them alike from place to place those darksome creatures.
अहन दासा वर्षभो वस्नयन्तोदव्रजे वर्चिनं शम्बरं च|	the hero slew the meanlyhuckstering dāsas varcin and Śambara where the waters gather.
परस्तोक इन नु राधसस्त इन्द्र दश कोशयीर्दश वाजिनोअदात|	out of thy bounty indra hath prastoka bestowed ten coffers and ten mettled horses.
दिवोदासादतिथिग्वस्य राधः शाम्बरं वसु परत्यग्रभीष्म|	we have received in turn from divodāsa Śambaras wealth the gift of atithigva.
दशाश्वान दश कोशान दश वस्त्राधिभोजना|	ten horses and ten treasurechests ten garments as an added gift.
दशो हिरण्यपिण्डान दिवोदासादसानिषम|	these and ten lumps of gold have i received from divodāsas hand.
दश रथान परष्टिमतः शतं गा अथर्वभ्यः|	ten cars with extra steed to each for the atharvans hundred cows.
अश्वथः पायवेअदात|	hath asvatha to payu given.
महि राधो विश्वजन्यं दधानान भरद्वाजान सार्ञ्जयो अभ्ययष्ट|	thus sṛñjayas son honoured the bharadvājas recipients of all noble gifts and bounty.
वनस्पते वीड्वङगो हि भूया अस्मत्सखा परतरणः सुवीरः|	lord of the wood be firm and strong in body be bearing us a brave victorious hero.
गोभिः संनद्धो असि वीळयस्वास्थाता ते जयतु जेत्वानि|	show forth thy strength compact with straps of leather and let thy rider win all spoils of battle.
दिवस पर्थिव्याः पर्योज उद्भ्र्तं वनस्पतिभ्यः पर्याभ्र्तं सहः|	its mighty strength was borrowed from the heaven and earth its conquering force was brought from sovrans of the wood.
अपामोज्मानं परि गोभिराव्र्तमिन्द्रस्य वज्रं हविषा रथं यज|	honour with holy gifts the car like indras bolt the car bound round with straps the vigour of the floods.
इन्द्रस्य वज्रो मरुतामनीकं मित्रस्य गर्भो वरुणस्य नाभिः|	thou bolt of indra vanguard of the maruts close knit to varuṇa and child of mitra.
सेमां नो हव्यदातिं जुषाणो देव रथ परति हव्या गर्भाय|	as such accepting gifts which here we offer receive o godlike chariot these oblations.
उप शवासय पर्थिवीमुत दयां पुरुत्रा ते मनुतां विष्ठितं जगत|	send forth thy voice aloud through earth and heaven and let the world in all its breadth regard thee.
स दुन्दुभे सजूरिन्द्रेण देवैर्दूराद दवीयोप सेध शत्रून|	o drum accordant with the gods and indra drive thou afar yea very far our foemen.
आ करन्दय बलमोजो न आ धा नि षटनिहि दुरिता बाधमानः|	thunder out strength and fill us full of vigour yea thunder forth and drive away all dangers.
अप परोथ दुन्दुभे दुछुना इत इन्द्रस्य मुष्टिरसि वीळयस्व|	drive hence o wardrum drive away misfortune thou art the fist of indra show thy firmness.
आमूरज परत्यावर्तयेमाः केतुमद दुन्दुभिर्वावदीति|	drive hither those and these again bring hither the wardrum speaks aloud as battles signal.
समश्वपर्णाश्चरन्ति नो नरोअस्माकमिन्द्र रथिनो जयन्तु|	our heroes winged with horses come together let our carwarriors indra be triumphant.
तवामिद धि हवामहे साता वाजस्य कारवः|	that we may win us wealth and power we poets verily call on thee.
तवां वर्त्रेष्विन्द्र सत्पतिं नरस्त्वां काष्ठास्वर्वतः|	in war men call on thee indra the heros lord in the steeds racecourse call on thee.
स तवं नश्चित्र वज्रहस्त धर्ष्णुया मह सतवानो अद्रिवः|	as such o wonderful whose hand holds thunder praised as mighty caster of the stone.
गामश्वं रथ्यमिन्द्र सं किर सत्रा वाजं न जिग्युषे|	pour on us boldly indra kine and chariotsteeds ever to be the conquerors strength.
यः सत्राहा विचर्षणिरिन्द्रं तं हूमहे वयम|	we call upon that indra who most active ever slays the foe.
सहस्रमुष्क तुविन्र्म्ण सत्पते भवा समत्सु नो वर्धे|	lord of the brave most manly with a thousand powers help thou and prosper us in fight.
बाधसे जनान वर्षभेव मन्युना घर्षौ मीळ्ह रचीषम|	rcisama thou forcest men as with a bull with anger in the furious fray.
अस्माकं बोध्यविता महाधने तनूष्वप्सु सूर्ये|	be thou our helper in the mighty battle fought for sunlight water and for life.
इन्द्र जयेष्ठं न आ भरनोजिष्ठं पपुरि शरवः|	o indra bring us name and fame enriching mightiest excellent.
येनेमे चित्र वज्रहस्त रोदसी ओभे सुशिप्र पराः|	wherewith o wondrous god fairvisored thunderarmed thou hast filled full this earth and heaven.
तवामुग्रमवसे चर्षणीसहं राजन देवेषु हूमहे|	we call on thee o king mighty amid the gods ruler of men to succour us.
विश्वा सु नो विथुरा पिब्दना वसोअमित्रान सुषहान कर्धि|	all that is weak in us excellent god make firm make our foes easy to subdue.
यदिन्द्र नाहुषीष्वानोजो नर्म्णं च कर्ष्टिषु|	all strength and valour that is found indra in tribes of nahusas and all the splendid fame that the five tribes enjoy.
यद वापञ्च कषितीनां दयुम्नमा भर सत्रा विश्वानि पौंस्या|	bring yea all manly powers at once.
यद वा तर्क्षौ मघवन दरुह्यावा जने यत पूरौ कच्च वर्ष्ण्यम|	or maghavan what vigorous strength in trksi lay in druhyus or in parus folk.
अस्मभ्यं तद रिरीहि सं नर्षाह्येअमित्रान पर्त्सुतुर्वणे|	fully bestow on us that in the conquering fray we may subdue our foes in fight.
इन्द्र तरिधातु शरणं तरिवरूथं सवस्तिमत|	o indra grant a happy home a triple refuge triply strong.
छर्दिर्यछ मघवद्भ्यश्च मह्यं च यावया दिद्युमेभ्यः|	bestow a dwellingplace on the rich lords and me and keep thy dart afar from these.
ये गव्यता मनसा शत्रुमादभुरभिप्रघ्नन्ति धर्ष्णुया|	they who with minds intent on spoil subdue the foe boldly attack and smite him down.
अध समा नो मघवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणस्तनूपा अन्तमो भव|	from these o indra maghavan who lovest song be closest guardian of our lives.
अध समा नो वर्धे भवेन्द्र नायमवा युधि|	and now o indra strengthen us come near and aid us in the fight.
यदन्तरिक्षेपतयन्ति पर्णिनो दिद्यवस्तिग्ममूर्धानः|	what time the feathered shafts are flying in the air the arrows with their sharpened points.
यत्र शूरासस्तन्वो वितन्वते परिया शर्म पितॄणाम|	give us where heroes strain their bodies in the fight the shelter that our fathers loved.
अध समा यछ तन्वे तने च छर्दिरचित्तं यावय दवेषः|	to us and to our sons give refuge keep afar all unobserved hostility.
यदिन्द्र सर्गे अर्वतश्चोदयासे महाधने|	when indra in the mighty fray thou urgest chargers to their speed.
असमने अध्वनिव्र्जिने पथि शयेनानिव शरवस्यतह|	on the uneven road and on a toilsome path like falcons eager for renown.
सिन्धून्रिव परवण आशुया यतो यदि कलोशमनु षवणि|	speeding like rivers rushing down a steep descent responsive to the urging call.
आ ये वयो न वर्व्र्तत्यामिषि गर्भीता बाह्वोर्गवि|	that come like birds attracted to the bait held in by reins in both the drivers hands.
एहि वां विमुचो नपादाघ्र्णे सं सचावहै|	son of deliverance come bright god.
रथीरतस्य नो भव|	let us twain go together be our charioteer of sacrifice.
रथीतमं कपर्दिनमीशानं राधसो महः|	we pray for wealth to thee most skilled of charioteers with braided hair.
रायः सखायमीमहे|	lord of great riches and our friend.
रायो धारास्याघ्र्णे वसो राशिरजाश्व|	bright god whose steeds are goats thou art a stream of wealth a treasureheap.
धीवतोधीवतः सखा|	the friend of every pious man.
पूषणं नवजाश्वमुप सतोषाम वाजिनम|	pūṣan who driveth goats for steeds the strong and mighty who is called.
सवसुर्यो जार उच्यते|	his sisters lover will we laud.
मातुर्दिधिषुमब्रवं सवसुर्जारः शर्णोतु नः|	his mothers suitor i address may he who loves his sister hear.
भरातेन्द्रस्य सखा मम|	brother of indra and my friend.
आजासः पूषणं रथे निश्र्म्भास्ते जनश्रियम|	may the surefooted goats come nigh conveying pūṣan on his car.
देवं वहन्तु बिभ्रतः|	the god who visiteth mankind.
वपुर्नु तच्चिकितुषे चिदस्तु समानं नाम धेनु पत्यमानम|	een to the wise let that be still a wonder to which the general name of cow is given.
मर्तेष्वन्यद दोहसे पीपाय सक्र्च्छुक्रं दुदुहे पर्श्निरूधः|	the one hath swelled among mankind for milking pṛśni hath drained but once her fair bright udder.
ये अग्नयो न शोशुचन्निधाना दविर्यत तरिर्मरुतो वाव्र्धन्त|	they who like kindled flames of fire are glowing the maruts twice and thrice have waxen mighty.
अरेञवो हिरण्ययास एषां साकं नर्म्णैः पौंस्येभिश्च भूवन|	golden and dustless were their cars invested with their great strength and their heroic vigour.
रुद्रस्य ये मीळ्हुषः सन्ति पुत्रा यांश्चो नु दाध्र्विर्भरध्यै|	they who are sons of the rainpouring rudra whom the longlasting one had power to foster.
विदे हि माता महो मही षा सेत पर्श्निः सुभ्वे गर्भमाधात|	the mighty ones whose germ great mother pṛśni is known to have received for mans advantage.
न य इषन्ते जनुषोअया नवन्तः सन्तोअवद्यानि पुनानाः|	they shrink not from the birth in this same manner still resting there they purge away reproaches.
निर्यद दुह्रे शुचयोअनु जोषमनु शरिया तन्वमुक्षमाणाः|	when they have streamed forth brilliant at their pleasure with their own splendour they bedew their bodies.
मक्षू न येषु दोहसे चिदया आ नाम धर्ष्णु मारुतन्दधानाः|	even those who bear the brave bold name of maruts whom not the active quickly wins for milking.
न ये सतौना अयासो मह्ना नू चित सुदानुरव वासदुग्रान|	even the liberal wards not off those fierce ones those who are light and agile in their greatness.
त इदुग्राः शवसा धर्ष्णुषेणा उभे युजन्त रोदसी सुमेके|	when strong in strength and armed with potent weapons they had united wellformed earth and heaven.
अध समैषु रोदसी सवशोचिरामवत्सु तस्थौ न रोकः|	rodasl stood among these furious heroes like splendour shining with her native brightness.
अनेनो वो मरुतो यामो अस्त्वनश्वश्चिद यमजत्यरथीः|	no team of goats shall draw your car o maruts no horse no charioteer be he who drives it.
अनवसो अनभीशू रजस्तूर्वि रोदसी पथ्या याति साधन|	halting not reinless through the air it travels speeding alone its paths through earth and heaven.
नास्य वर्ता न तरुता नवस्ति मरुतो यमवथ वजसातौ|	none may obstruct none overtake o maruts him whom ye succour in the strife of battle.
तोके वा गोषु तनये यमप्सु स वरजं दर्ता पार्ये अध दयोः|	for sons and progeny for kine and waters he bursts the cowstall on the day of trial.
पर चित्रमर्कं गर्णते तुराय मारुताय सवतवसे भरध्वम|	bring a bright hymn to praise the band of maruts the singers rapid strong in native vigour.
ये सहांसि सहसा सहन्ते रेजते अग्ने पर्थिवी मखेभ्यः|	who conquer mighty strength with strength more mighty earth shakes in terror at their wars o agni.
तविषीमन्तो अध्वरस्येव दिद्युत तर्षुच्यवसो जुह्वो नाग्नेः|	bright like the flashing flames of sacrifices like tongues of fire impetuous in their onset.
अर्चत्रयो धुनयो न वीरा भराजज्जन्मानो मरुतो अध्र्ष्टाः|	chanting their psalm singing aloud like heroes splendid from birth invincible the maruts.
तं वर्धन्तं मारुतं भराजद्र्ष्टिं रुद्रस्य सूनुं हवसा विवासे|	that swelling band i call with invocation the brood of rudra armed with glittering lances.
दिवः शर्धाय शुचयो मनीषा गिरयो नाप उग्रा अस्प्र्ध्रन|	pure hymns are meet for that celestial army like floods and mountains have the strong ones battled.
मन्दस्व होत्रादनु जोषमन्धसोअध्वर्यवः स पूर्णांवष्ट्यासिचम|	enjoy thy fill of meath out of the hotars cup adhvaryus he desires a full draught poured for him.
तस्मा एतं भरत तद्वशो ददिर्होत्राद सोमं दरविणोदः पिब रतुभिः|	bring it him seeking this he gives granter of wealth drink soma with the Ṛtus from the hotars cup.
यमु पूर्वमहुवे तमिदं हुवे सेदु हव्यो ददिर्यो नाम पत्यते|	he whom of old i called on him i call on now he is to be invoked his name is he who gives.
अध्वर्युभिः परस्थितं सोम्यं मधु पोत्रात सोमं द प र|	here brought by priests is soma meath granter of wealth drink soma with the Ṛtus from the potars cup.
मेद्यन्तु ते वह्नयो येभिरीयसेअरिषण्यन वीळयस्वा वनस्पते|	fat may the horses be wherewith thou speedest on lord of the wood unharming strengthen thou thyself.
आयूया धर्ष्णो अभिगूर्या तवं नेष्ट्रात सोमं|	drawing and seizing bold one thou who grantest wealth drink soma with the Ṛtus from the neṣṭars cup.
अपाद धोत्रादुत पोत्रादमत्तोत नेष्ट्रादजुषत परयो हितम|	from hotars cup and potars he hath drunk and joyed the proffered food hath pleased him from the neṣṭars bowl.
तुरीयं पात्रमम्र्क्तममर्त्यं दरविणोदाः पिबतु दराविणोदसः|	the fourth cup undisturbed immortal let him drink who giveth wealth the cup of the wealthgiving god.
अर्वाञ्चमद्य यय्यं नर्वाहणं रथं युञ्जाथामिह वां विमोचनम|	yoke o ye twain today your herobearing car swiftmoving hitherward your loosingplace is here.
पर्ङकतं हवींषि मधुना हि कं गतमथा सोमं पिबतं वाजिनीवसू|	mix the oblations then come hither with the meath and drink the soma ye rich in abundant strength.
जोष्यग्ने समिधं जोष्याहुतिं जोषि बरह्म जन्यं जोषिसुष्टुतिम|	agni accept the fuel and our offered gift accept the prayer of man accept our eulogy.
विश्वेभिर्विश्वान रतुना वसो मह उशन देवानुशतः पायया हविः|	do thou with all with Ṛtu o thou excellent fain make the great gods all fain taste the gift we bring.
समिद्धो अग्निर्निहितः पर्थिव्यां परत्यं विश्वानि भुवनान्यस्थात|	agni is set upon the earth well kindled he standeth in the presence of all beings.
होता पावकः परदिवः सुमेधा देवो देवान यजत्वग्निरर्हन|	wise ancient god the priest and purifier let agni serve the gods for he is worthy.
नराशंसः परति धामान्यञ्जन तिस्रो दिवः परति मह्ना सवर्चिः|	may narāśaṁsa lighting up the chambers bright in his majesty through threefold heaven.
घर्तप्रुषा मनसा हव्यमुन्दन मूर्धन यज्ञस्य समनक्तु देवान|	steeping the gift with oil diffusing purpose bedew the gods at chiefest time of worship.
ईळितो अग्ने मनसा नो अर्हन देवान यक्षि मानुषात पूर्वो अद्य|	adored in heart as is thy right o agni serve the gods first today before the mortal.
स आ वह मरुतां शर्धो अच्युतमिन्द्रं नरो बर्हिषदं यजध्वम|	bring thou the marut host ye men do worship to indra seated on the grass eternal.
देव बर्हिर्वर्धमानं सुवीरं सतीर्णं राये सुभरं वेद्यस्याम|	o grass divine increasing rich in heroes strewn for wealths sake well laid upon this altar.
घर्तेनाक्तं वसवः सीदतेदं विश्वे देवा आदित्या यज्ञियासः|	on this bedewed with oil sit ye o vasus sit all ye gods ye holy ye Ādityas.
वि शरयन्तामुर्विया हूयमाना दवारो देवीः सुप्रायणा नमोभिः|	wide be the doors the goddesses thrown open easy to pass invoked through adorations.
वयचस्वतीर्वि परथन्तामजुर्या वर्णं पुनानायशसं सुवीरम|	let them unfold expansive everlasting that sanctify the class famed rich in heroes.
साध्वपांसि सनता न उक्षिते उषासानक्ता वय्येव रण्विते|	good work for us the glorious night and morning like female weavers waxen from aforetime.
तन्तुं ततं संवयन्ती समीची यज्ञस्य पेशः सुदुघे पयस्वती|	yielders of rich milk interweave in concert the longextended thread the web of worship.
दैव्या होतारा परथमा विदुष्टर रजु यक्षतः सं रचावपुष्टरा|	let the two heavenly heralds first most wise most fair present oblation duly with the sacred verse.
देवान यजन्ताव रतुथा समञ्जतो नाभा पर्थिव्या अधि सानुषु तरिषु|	worshipping god at ordered seasons decking them at three high places at the centre of the earth.
सरस्वती साधयन्ती धियं न इळा देवी भारती विश्वतूर्तिः|	sarasvatī who perfects our devotion iḷā divine bhāratī all surpassing.
तिस्रो देवीः सवधया बर्हिरेदमछिद्रं पान्तुशरणं निषद्य|	three goddesses with power inherent seated protect this holy grass our flawless refuge.
पिशङगरूपः सुभरो वयोधाः शरुष्टी वीरो जायते देवकामः|	born is the pious hero swift of hearing like gold in hue well formed and full of vigour.
परजां तवष्टा वि षयतु नाभिमस्मे अथा देवानामप्येतु पाथः|	may tvaṣṭar lengthen our line and kindred and may they reach the place which gods inhabit.
वनस्पतिरवस्र्जन्नुप सथादग्निर्हविः सूदयाति पर धीभिः|	vanaspati shall stand anear and start us and agni with his arts prepare oblation.
तरिधा समक्तं नयतु परजानन देवेभ्यो दैव्यः शमितोप हव्यम|	let the skilled heavenly immolator forward unto the gods the offering thrice anointed.
घर्तं मिमिक्षे घर्तमस्य योनिर्घ्र्ते शरितो घर्तं वस्य धाम|	oil has been mixt oil is his habitation in oil he rests oil is his proper province.
अनुष्वधमा वह मादयस्व सवाहाक्र्तं वर्षभ वक्षि हव्यम|	come as thy wont is o thou steer rejoice thee bear off the oblation duly consecrated.
शरेष्ठं यविष्ठ भारताग्ने दयुमन्तमा भर|	vasu thou most youthful god bhārata agni bring us wealth.
वसो पुरुस्प्र्हं रयिम|	excellent splendid muchdesired.
मा नो अरातिरीशत देवस्य मर्त्यस्य च|	let no malignity prevail against us either gods or mans.
पर्षि तस्या उतद्विषः|	save us from this and enmity.
विश्वा उत तवया वयं धारा उदन्या इव|	so through thy favour may we force through all our enemies a way.
अति गाहेमहि दविषः|	as twere through streaming waterfloods.
शुचिः पावक वन्द्योअग्ने बर्हद वि रोचसे|	thou purifier agni high shinest forth bright adorable.
तवं घर्तेभिराहुतः|	when worshipped with the sacred oil.
तवं नो असि भारताग्ने वशाभिरुक्षभिः|	ours art thou agni bhārata honoured by us with barren cows.
अष्टापदीभिराहुतः|	with bullocks and with kine in calf.
दर्वन्नः सर्पिरासुतिः परत्नो होता वरेण्यः|	woodfed bedewed with sacred oil ancient invoker excellent.
सहसस पुत्रो अद्भुतः|	the son of strength the wonderful.
तवमग्ने दयुभिस्त्वमाशुशुक्षणिस्त्वमद्भ्यस्त्वमश्मनस परि|	thou agni shining in thy glory through the days art brought to life from out the waters from the stone.
तवं वनेभ्यस्त्वमोषधीभ्यस्त्वं नर्णां नर्पते जायसे शुचिः|	from out the forest trees and herbs that grow on ground thou sovran lord of men art generated pure.
तवाग्ने होत्रं तव पोत्रं रत्वियं तव नेष्ट्रं तवमग्निद रतायतः|	thine is the heralds task and cleansers duly timed leader art thou and kindler for the pious man.
तव परशास्त्रं तवमध्वरीयसि बरह्मा चासि गर्हपतिश्च नो दमे|	thou art director thou the ministering priest thou art the brahman lord and master in our home.
तवमग्न इन्द्रो वर्षभः सतामसि तवं विष्णुरुरुगायो नमस्यः|	hero of heroes agni thou art indra thou art viṣṇu of the mighty stride adorable.
तवं बरह्मा रयिविद बरह्मणस पते तवं विधर्तःसचसे पुरन्ध्या|	thou brahmaṇaspati the brahman finding wealth thou o sustainer with thy wisdom tendest us.
तवमग्ने राजा वरुणो धर्तव्रतस्त्वं मित्रो भवसि दस्म ईड्यः|	agni thou art king varuṇa whose laws stand fast as mitra wonderworker thou must be implored.
तवमर्यमा सत्पतिर्यस्य सम्भुजं तवमंशो विदथे देव भाजयुः|	aryaman heroes lord art thou enriching all and liberal aṁśa in the synod o thou god.
तवमग्ने तवष्टा विधते सुवीर्यं तव गनावो मित्रमहः सजात्यम|	thou givest strength as tvaṣṭar to the worshipper thou wielding mitras power hast kinship with the dames.
तवमाशुहेमा ररिषे सवश्व्यं तवं नरां शर्धो असि पुरूवसुः|	thou urging thy fleet coursers givest noble steeds a host of heroes art thou with great store of wealth.
तवमग्ने रुद्रो असुरो महो दिवस्त्वं शर्धो मारुतं पर्क्ष ईशिषे|	rudra art thou the asura of mighty heaven thou art the maruts host thou art the lord of food.
तवं वातैररुणैर्यासि शंगयस्त्वं पूषा विधतः पासि नु तमना|	thou goest with red winds bliss hast thou in thine home as pūṣan thou thyself protectest worshippers.
तवमग्ने दरविणोदा अरंक्र्ते तवं देवः सविता रत्नधासि|	giver of wealth art thou to him who honours thee thou art god savitar granter of precious things.
तवं भगो नर्पते वस्व ईशिषे तवं पायुर्दमे यस्तेऽविधत|	as bhaga lord of men thou rulest over wealth and guardest in his house him who hath served thee well.
तवमग्ने दम आ विश्पतिं विशस्त्वां राजानं सुविदत्रं रञ्जते|	to thee the peoples lord within the house the folk press forward to their king most graciously inclined.
तवं विश्वानि सवनीक पत्यसे तवं सहस्राणि शता दश परति|	lord of the lovely look all things belong to thee ten hundred yea a thousand are outweighed by thee.
तवामग्ने पितरमिष्टिभिर्नरस्त्वां भरात्राय शम्या तनूरुचम|	agni men seek thee as a father with their prayers win thee brightformed to brotherhood with holy act.
तवं पुत्रो भवसि यस्तेअविधत तवं सखा सुशेवः पास्याध्र्षः|	thou art a son to him who duly worships thee and as a trusty friend thou guardest from attack.
तवमग्न रभुराके नमस्यस्त्वं वाजस्य कषुमतो राय ईशिषे|	a Ṛbhu art thou agni near to be adored thou art the sovran lord of foodful spoil and wealth.
तवं वि भास्यनु दक्षि दावने तवं विशिक्षुरसियज्ञमातनिः|	thou shinest brightly forth thou burnest to bestow pervading sacrifice thou lendest us thine help.
तवमग्ने अदितिर्देव दाशुषे तवं होत्रा भारती वर्धसेगिरा|	thou god art aditi to him who offers gifts thou hotrā bhāratī art strengthened by the song.
तवमिळा षतहिमासि दक्षसे तवं वर्त्रहा वसुपते सरस्वती|	thou art the hundredwintered iḷā to give strength lord of wealth vṛtraslayer and sarasvatī.
तवमग्ने सुभ्र्त उत्तमं वयस्तव सपार्हे वर्ण आ सन्द्र्शि शरियः|	thou agni cherished well art highest vital power in thy delightful hue are glories visible.
तवं वाजः परतरणो बर्हन्नसि तवं रयिर्बहुलो विश्वतस पर्थुः|	thou art the lofty might that furthers each design thou art wealth manifold diffused on every side.
तवामग्न आदित्यास आस्यं तवां जिह्वां शुचयश्चक्रिरेकवे|	thee agni have the Ādityas taken as their mouth the bright ones have made thee o sage to be their tongue.
तवां रातिषाचो अध्वरेषु सश्चिरे तवे देवा हविरदन्त्याहुतम|	they who love offerings cling to thee at solemn rites by thee the gods devour the duly offered food.
तवे अग्ने विश्वे अन्र्तासो अद्रुह आसा देवा हविरदन्त्याहुतम|	by thee o agni all the immortal guileless gods cat with thy mouth the oblation that is offered them.
तवया मर्तासः सवदन्त आसुतिं तवं गर्भो वीरुधां जज्ञिषे शुचिः|	by thee do mortal men give sweetness to their drink bright art thou born the embryo of the plants of earth.
तवं तान सं च परति चासि मज्मनाग्ने सुजात पर च देवरिच्यसे|	with these thou art united agni yea thou god of noble birth surpassest them in majesty.
पर्क्षो यदत्र महिना वि ते भुवदनु दयावाप्र्थिवी रोदसी उभे|	which through the power of good here spreads abroad from thee diffused through both the worlds throughout the earth and heaven.
ये सतोत्र्भ्यो गोग्रामश्वपेशसमग्ने रातिमुपस्र्जन्ति सूरयः|	the princely worshippers who send to those who sing thy praise o agni guerdon graced with kine and steeds.
अस्माञ्च तांश्च पर हि नेषि वस्य आ बर्हद वदेम विदथे सुवीराः|	lead thou both these and us forward to higher bliss with brave men in the assembly may we speak aloud.
इमा गिर आदित्येभ्यो घर्तस्नूः सनाद राजभ्यो जुह्वा जुहोमि|	these hymns that drop down fatness with the ladle i ever offer to the kings Ādityas.
शर्णोतु मित्रो अर्यमा भगो नस्तुविजातो वरुणो दक्षो अंशः|	may mitra aryaman and bhaga hear us the mighty varuṇa dakṣa and aṁśa.
इमं सतोमं सक्रतवो मे अद्य मित्रो अर्यमा वरुणो जुषन्त|	with one accord may aryaman and mitra and varuṇa this day accept this praisesong.
आदित्यासः शुचयो धारपूता अव्र्जिना अनवद्या अरिष्टाः|	Ādityas bright and pure as streams of water free from all guile and falsehood blameless perfect.
त आदित्यास उरवो गभीरा अदब्धासो दिप्सन्तो भूर्यक्षाः|	these gods Ādityas vast profound and faithful with many eyes fain to deceive the wicked.
अन्तः पश्यन्ति वर्जिनोत साधु सर्वं राजभ्यः परमा चिदन्ति|	looking within behold the good and evil near to the kings is even the thing most distant.
धारयन्त आदित्यासो जगत सथा देवा विश्वस्य भुवनस्य गोपाः|	upholding that which moves and that which moves not Ādityas gods protectors of all being.
दीर्घाधियो रक्षमाणा असुर्यं रतावानश्चयमाना रणानि|	provident guarding well the world of spirits true to eternal law the debtexactors.
विद्यामादित्या अवसो वो अस्य यदर्यमन भय आ चिन मयोभु|	may i Ādityas share m this your favour which aryaman brings profit een in danger.
युष्माकं मित्रावरुणा परणीतौ परि शवभ्रेव दुरितानिव्र्ज्याम|	under your guidance varuṇa and mitra round troubles may i pass like rugged places.
सुगो हि वो अर्यमन मित्र पन्था अन्र्क्षरो वरुण साधुरस्ति|	smooth is your path o aryaman and mitra excellent is it varuṇa and thornless.
तेनादित्या अधि वोचता नो यछता नो दुष्परिहन्तु शर्म|	thereon Ādityas send us down your blessing grant us a shelter hard to be demolished.
पिपर्तु नो अदिती राजपुत्राति दवेषांस्यर्यमा सुगेभिः|	mother of kings may aditi transport us by fair paths aryaman beyond all hatred.
बर्हन मित्रस्य वरुणस्य शर्मोप सयाम पुरुवीरा अरिष्टाः|	may we uninjured girt by many heroes win varuṇas and mitras high protection.
तिस्रो भूमीर्धारयन तरीन्रुत दयून तरीणि वरता विदथे अन्तरेषाम|	with their support they stay three earths three heavens three are their functions in the gods assembly.
रतेनादित्या महि वो महित्वं तदर्यमन वरुण मित्र चारु|	mighty through law Ādityas is your greatness fair is it aryaman varuṇa and mitra.
तरी रोचना दिव्या धारयन्त हिरण्ययाः शुचयो धारपूताः|	golden and splendid pure like streams of water they hold aloft the three bright heavenly regions.
अस्वप्नजो अनिमिषा अदब्धा उरुशंसा रजवे मर्त्याय|	neer do they slumber never close their eyelids faithful farruling for the righteous mortal.
तवं विश्वेषां वरुणासि राजा ये च देवा असुर ये च मर्ताः|	thou over all o varuṇa art sovran be they gods asura or be they mortals.
शतं नो रास्व शरदो विचक्षेअच्यामायूंषि सुधितानि पूर्वा|	grant unto us to see a hundred autumns ours be the blest long lives of our forefathers.
न दक्षिणा वि चिकिते न सव्या न पराचीनमादित्या नोतपश्चा|	neither the right nor left do i distinguish neither the cast nor yet the west Ādityas.
पाक्या चिद वसवो धीर्या चिद युष्मानीतो अभयंज्योतिरश्याम|	simple and guided by your wisdom vasus may i attain the light that brings no danger.
यो राजभ्य रतनिभ्यो ददाश यं वर्धयन्ति पुष्टयश्चनित्याः|	he who bears gifts unto the kings true leaders he whom their everlasting blessings prosper.
स रेवान याति परथमो रथेन वसुदावा विदथेषु परशस्तः|	moves with his chariot first in rank and wealthy munificent and lauded in assemblies.
शुचिरपः सूयवसा अदब्ध उप कषेति वर्द्धवयाः सुवीरः|	pure faithful very strong with heroes round him he dwells beside the waters rich with pasture.
नकिष टं घनन्त्यन्तितो न दूराद य आदित्यानां भवति परणीतौ|	none slays from near at hand or from a distance him who is under the Ādityas guidance.
अदिते मित्र वरुणोत मर्ळ यद वो वयं चक्र्मा कच्चिदागः|	aditi mitra varuṇa forgive us however we have erred and sinned against you.
उर्वश्यामभयं जयोतिरिन्द्र मा नो दीर्घा अभि नशन तमिस्राः|	may i obtain the broad light free from peril o indra let not during darkness seize us.
उभे अस्मै पीपयतः समीची दिवो वर्ष्टिं सुभगो नाम पुष्यन|	for him the twain united pour their fulness the rain from heaven he thrives most highly favoured.
उभा कषयावाजयन याति पर्त्सूभावर्धौ भवतः साधू अस्मै|	he goes to war mastering both the mansions to him both portions of the world are gracious.
या वो माया अभिद्रुहे यजत्राः पाशा आदित्या रिपवे विच्र्त्ताः|	your guiles ye holy ones to quell oppressors your snares spread out against the foe Ādityas.
अश्वीव तानति येषं रथेनारिष्टा उरावा शर्मन सयाम|	may i carborne pass like a skilful horseman uninjured may we dwell in spacious shelter.
माहं मघोनो वरुण परियस्य भूरिदाव्न आ विदं शूनमापेः|	may i not live o varuṇa to witness my wealthy liberal dear friends destitution.
मा रायो राजन सुयमादव सथां बर्हद वदेम|	king may o never lack wellordered riches loud may we speak with heroes in assembly.
रतुर्जनित्री तस्या अपस परि मक्षू जात आविशद यासु वर्धते|	the season was the parent and when born therefrom it entered rapidly the floods wherein it grows.
तदाहना अभवत पिप्युषी पयोअंशोः पीयूषं परथमं तदुक्थ्यम|	thence was it full of sap streaming with milky juice the milk of the plants stalk is chief and meet for lauds.
सध्रीमा यन्ति परि बिभ्रतीः पयो विश्वप्स्न्याय पर भरन्त भोजनम|	they come trooping together bearing milk to him and bring him sustenance who gives support to all.
समानो अध्वा परवतामनुष्यदे यस्ताक्र्णोः परथमं सास्युक्थ्यः|	the way is common for the downward streams to flow thou who didst these things first art worthy of our lauds.
अन्वेको वदति यद ददाति तद रूपा मिनन तदपा एक ईयते|	one priest announces what the institutor gives one altering the forms zealously plies his task.
विश्वा एकस्य विनुदस्तितिक्षते यस्ताक्र|	the third corrects the imperfections left by each thou who didst these things first art worthy of our lauds.
परजाभ्यः पुष्टिं विभजन्त आसते रयिमिव पर्ष्ठं परभवन्तमायते|	dealing out food unto their people there they sit like wealth to him who comes more than the back can bear.
असिन्वन दंष्ट्रैः पितुरत्ति भोजनं यस्ताक्र|	greedily with his teeth he eats the masters food thou who didst these things first art worthy of our lauds.
अधाक्र्णोः पर्थिवीं सन्द्र्शे दिवे यो धौतीनामहिहन्नारिणक पथः|	thou hast created earth to look upon the sky thou slaying ahi settest free the rivers paths.
तं तवा सतोमेभिरुदभिर्न वाजिनं देवं देवा अजनन सास्युक्थ्यः|	thee such a god the gods have quickened with their lauds even as a steed with waters meet for praise art thou.
यो भोजनं च दयसे च वर्धनमार्द्रादा शुष्कं मधुमद दुदोहिथ|	thou givest increase thou dealest to us our food thou milkest from the moist the dry the rich in sweets.
स शेवधिं नि दधिषे विवस्वति विश्वस्यैक ईशिषे सास्यु|	thou by the worshipper layest thy precious store thou art sole lord of all meet for our praise art thou.
यः पुष्पिणीश्च परस्वश्च धर्मणाधि दाने वयवनीरधारयः|	thou who hast spread abroad the streams by stablished law and in the field the plants that blossom and bear seed.
यश्चासमा अजनो दिद्युतो दिव उरुरूर्वानभितः स उ|	thou who hast made the matchless lightnings of the skyvast compassing vast realms meet for our praise art thou.
यो नार्मरं सहवसुं निहन्तवे पर्क्षाय च दासवेशाय चावहः|	who broughtest nārmara with all his wealth for sake of food to slay him that the fiends might be destroyed.
ऊर्जयन्त्या अपरिविष्टमास्यमुतैवाद्य पुरुक्र्त्स उ|	broughtest the face unclouded of the strengthening one performing much even now worthy art thou of praise.
शतं वा यस्य दश साकमाद्य एकस्य शरुष्टौ यद धचोदमाविथ|	thou boundest up the dāsas hundred friends and ten when at ones hearing thou helpest thy worshipper.
अरज्जौ दस्यून समुनब दभीतये सुप्राव्योभवः स उ|	thou for dabhīti boundest dasyus not with cords thou wast a mighty help worthy of lauds art thou.
विश्वेदनु रोधना अस्य पौंस्यं ददुरस्मै दधिरे कर्त्नवे धनम|	all banks of rivers yielded to his manly might to him they gave to him the strong gave up their wealth.
षळ अस्तभ्ना विष्टिरः पञ्च सन्द्र्शः परिपरो अभवः स उ|	the six directions hast thou fixed a fivefold view thy victories reached afar worthy of lauds art thou.
सुप्रवाचनं तव वीर वीर्यं यदेकेन करतुना विन्दसे वसु|	meet for high praise o hero is thy power that with thy single wisdom thou obtainest wealth.
जातूष्ठिरस्य पर वयः सहस्वतो या चकर्थ सेन्द्र विश्वास्युक्थ्यः|	the lifesupport of conquering jātūṣṭhira indra for all thy deeds worthy of lauds art thou.
अरमयः सरपसस्तराय कं तुर्वीतये च वय्याय च सरुतिम|	thou for turvīti heldest still the flowing floods the riverstream for vayya easily to pass.
नीचा सन्तमुदनयः पराव्र्जं परान्धं शरोणं शरवयन स उ|	didst raise the outcast from the depths and gavest fame unto the halt and blind worthy of lauds art thou.
अस्मभ्यं तद वसो दानाय राधः समर्थयस्व बहु ते वसव्यम|	prepare thyself to grant us that great bounty o vasu for abundant is thy treasure.
इन्द्र यच्चित्रं शरवस्या अनु दयून बर्हद वदेम व स|	snatch up the wonderful o indra daily loud may we speak with heroes in assembly.
इन्धानो अग्निं वनवद वनुष्यतः कर्तब्रह्मा शूशुवद रातहव्य इत|	he lighting up the flame shall conquer enemies strong shall he be who offers prayer and brings his gift.
जातेन जातमति स पर सर्स्र्ते यंयं युजंक्र्णुते बरह्मणस पतिः|	he with his seed spreads forth beyond anothers seed whomever brahmaṇaspati takes for his friend.
वीरेभिर्वीरान वनवद वनुष्यतो गोभी रयिं पप्रथद बोधति तमना|	with heroes he shall overcome his hero foes and spread his wealth by kine wise by himself is be.
तोकं च तस्य तनयं च वर्धते यंयं|	his children and his childrens children grow in strength whomever brahmaṇaspati takes for his friend.
सिन्धुर्न कषोदः शिमीवान रघायतो वर्षेव वध्रीन्रभि वष्ट्योजसा|	he mighty like a raving rivers billowy flood as a bull conquers oxen overcomes with strength.
अग्नेरिव परसितिर्नाह वर्तवे यंयं|	like agnis blazing rush he may not be restrained whomever brahmaṇaspati takes for his friend.
तस्मा अर्षन्ति दिव्या असश्चतः स सत्वभिः परथमो गोषुगछति|	for him the floods of heaven flow never failing down first with the heroes he goes forth to war for kine.
अनिभ्र्ष्टतविषिर्हन्त्योजसा यंयं|	he slays in unabated vigour with great might whomever brahmaṇaspati takes for his friend.
तस्मा इद विश्वे धुनयन्त सिन्धवोअछिद्रा शर्म दधिरे पुरूणि|	all roaring rivers pour their waters down for him and many a flawless shelter hath been granted him.
देवानां सुम्ने सुभगः स एधते यंयं|	blest with the happiness of gods he prospers well whomever brahmaṇaspati takes for his friend.
गणानां तवा गणपतिं हवामहे कविं कवीनामुपमश्रवस्तमम|	we call thee lord and leader of the heavenly hosts the wise among the wise the famousest of all.
जयेष्ठराजं बरह्मणां बरह्मणस पत आ नः षर्ण्वन्नूतिभिः सीद सादनम|	the king supreme of prayers o brahmaṇaspati hear us with help sit down in place of sacrifice.
देवाश्चित ते असुर्य परचेतसो बर्हस्पते यज्ञियं भागमानशुः|	bṛhaspati god immortal verily the gods have gained from thee the wise a share in holy rites.
उस्रा इव सूर्यो जयोतिषा महो विश्वेषामिज्जनिता बरह्मणामसि|	as with great light the sun brings forth the rays of morn so thou alone art father of all sacred prayer.
आ विबाध्या परिरापस्तमांसि च जयोतिष्मन्तं रथं रतस्य तिष्ठसि|	when thou hast chased away revilers and the gloom thou mountest the refulgent car of sacrifice.
बर्हस्पते भीमममित्रदम्भनं रक्षोहणंगोत्रभिदं सवर्विदम|	the awful car bṛhaspati that quells the foe slays demons cleaves the stall of kine and finds the light.
सुनीतिभिर्नयसि तरायसे जनं यस्तुभ्यं दाशान न तमंहो अश्नवत|	thou leadest with good guidance and preservest men distress oertakes not him who offers gifts to thee.
बरह्मद्विषस्तपनो मन्युमीरसि बर्हस्पते महि तत ते महित्वनम|	him who hates prayer thou punishest bṛhaspati quelling his wrath herein is thy great mightiness.
न तमंहो न दुरितं कुतश्चन नारातयस्तितिरुर्न दवयाविनः|	no sorrow no distress from any side no foes no creatures doubletongued have overcome the man.
विश्वा इदस्माद धवरसो वि बाधसे यं सुगोपा रक्षसि बरह्मणस पते|	thou drivest all seductive fiends away from him whom careful guard thou keepest brahmaṇaspati.
तवं नो गोपाः पथिक्र्द विचक्षणस्तव वरताय मतिभिर्जरामहे|	thou art our keeper wise preparer of our paths we for thy service sing to thee with hymns of praise.
बर्हस्पते यो नो अभि हवरो दधे सवा तं मर्मर्तु दुछुना हरस्वती|	bṛhaspati whoever lays a snare for us him may his evil fate precipitate destroy.
उत वा यो नो मर्चयादनागसोअरातीवा मर्तः सानुको वर्कः|	him too who threatens us without offence of ours the evilminded arrogant rapacious man.
बर्हस्पते अप तं वर्तया पथः सुगं नो अस्यै देववीतये कर्धि|	him turn thou from our path away bṛhaspati give us fair access to this banquet of the gods.
तरातारं तवा तनूनां हवामहेअवस्पर्तरधिवक्तारमस्मयुम|	thee as protector of our bodies we invoke thee saviour as the comforter who loveth us.
बर्हस्पते देवनिदो नि बर्हय मा दुरेवा उत्तरं सुम्नमुन नशन|	strike o bṛhaspati the gods revilers down and let not the unrighteous come to highest bliss.
तवया वयं सुव्र्धा बरह्मणस पते सपार्हा वसु मनुष्या ददीमहि|	through thee kind prosperer o brahmaṇaspati may we obtain the wealth of men which all desire.
या नो दूरे तळितो या अरातयोअभि सन्ति जम्भया ता अनप्नसः|	and all our enemies who near or far away prevail against us crush and leave them destitute.
तवया वयमुत्तमं धीमहे वयो बर्हस्पते पप्रिणा सस्निना युजा|	with thee as our own rich and liberal ally may we bṛhaspati gain highest power of life.
मा नो दुःशंसो अभिदिप्सुरीशत पर सुशंसा मतिभिस्तारिषीमहि|	let not the guileful wicked man be lord of usstill may we prosper singing goodly hymns of praise.
अनानुदो वर्षभो जग्मिराहवं निष्टप्ता शत्रुं पर्तनासुसासहिः|	strong never yielding hastening to the battlecry consumer of the foe victorious in the strife.
असि सत्य रणया बरह्मणस पत उग्रस्य चिद दमिता वीळुहर्षिणः|	thou art sins true avenger brahmaṇaspati who tamest een the fierce the wildly passionate.
अदेवेन मनसा यो रिशण्यति शासामुग्रो मन्यमानो जिघांसति|	whoso with mind ungodly seeks to do us harm who deeming him a man of might mid lords would slay.
बर्हस्पते म परणक तस्य नो वधो नि कर्म मन्युं दुरेवस्य शर्धतः|	let not his deadly blow reach us bṛhaspati may we humiliate the strong illdoers wrath.
भरेषु हव्यो नमसोपसद्यो गन्ता वाजेषु सनिता धनं धनम|	the mover mid the spoil the winner of all wealth to be invoked in fight and reverently adored.
विश्वा इदर्यो अभिदिप्स्वो मर्धो बर्हस्पतिर्वि ववर्हा रथां इव|	bṛhaspati hath overthrown like cars of war all wicked enemies who fain would injure us.
तेजिष्थया तपनि रक्षसस्तप ये तवा निदे दधिरे दर्ष्टवीर्यम|	burn up the demons with thy fiercest flaming brand those who have scorned thee in thy manifested might.
आविस्तत कर्ष्व यदसत त उक्थ्यं बर्हस्पते वि परिरापो अर्दय|	show forth that power that shall deserve the hymn of praise destroy the evil speakers o bṛhaspati.
बर्हस्पते अति यदर्यो अर्हाद दयुमद विभाति करतुमज्जनेषु|	bṛhaspati that which the foe deserves not which shines among the folk effectual splendid.
यद दीदयच्छवस रतप्रजात तदस्मसु दरविणं धेहिचित्रम|	that son of law i which is with might refulgentthat treasure wonderful bestow thou on us.
मा न सतेनेभ्यो ये अभि दरुहस पदे निरामिणो रिपवोअन्नेषु जाग्र्धुः|	give us not up to those who foes in ambuscade are greedy for the wealth of him who sits at ease.
आ देवानामोहते वि वरयो हर्दि बर्हस्पते नपरः साम्नो विदुः|	who cherish in their heart abandonment of gods bṛhaspati no further rest shall they obtain.
विश्वेभ्यो हि तवा भुवनेभ्यस परि तवष्टाजनत साम्नः साम्नः कविः|	for tvaṣṭar he who knows each sacred song brought thee to life preeminent oer all the things that be.
स रणचिद रणया बरह्मणस पतिर्द्रुहो हन्ता मह रतस्य धर्तरि|	guiltscourger guiltavenger is bṛhaspati who slays the spoiler and upholds the mighty law.
तव शरिये वयजिहीत पर्वतो गवां गोत्रमुदस्र्जो यदङगिरः|	the mountain for thy glory cleft itself apart when aṅgiras thou openedst the stall of kine.
इन्द्रेण युजा तमसा परीव्र्तं बर्हस्पते निरपामौब्जो अर्णवम|	thou o bṛhaspati with indra for ally didst hurl down waterfloods which gloom had compassed round.
बरह्मणस पते तवमस्य यन्ता सूक्तस्य बोधि तनयं च जिन्व|	o brahmaṇaspati be thou controller of this our hymn and prosper thou our children.
विश्वं तद भद्रं यदवन्ति देवा बर्हद वदेम|	all that the gods regard with love is blessed loud may we speak with heroes in assembly.
कनिक्रदज्जनुषं परब्रुवाण इयर्ति वाचमरितेव नावम|	telling his race aloud with cries repeated he sends his voice out as his boat a steersman.
सुमङगलश्च शकुने भवासि मा तवा का चिदभिभा विश्व्या विदत|	o bird be ominous of happy fortune from no side may calamity befall thee.
मा तवा शयेन उद वधीन मा सुपर्णो मा तवा विददिषुमान्वीरो अस्ता|	let not the falcon kill thee nor the eagle let not the arrowbearing archer reach thee.
पित्र्यामनु परदिशं कनिक्रदत सुमङगलो भद्रवादी वदेह|	still crying in the region of the fathers speak here auspicious bearing joyful tidings.
अव करन्द दक्षिणतो गर्हाणां सुमङगलो भद्रवादी शकुन्ते|	bringing good tidings bird of happy omen call thou out loudly southward of our dwellings.
मा न सतेन ईशत माघशंसो बर्हद|	so that no thief no sinner may oppress us loud may we speak with heroes in assembly.
यो जात एव परथमो मनस्वान देवो देवान करतुना पर्यभूषत|	he who just born chief god of lofty spirit by power and might became the gods protector.
यस्य शुष्माद रोदसी अभ्यसेतां नर्म्णस्य मह्ना स जनास इन्द्रः|	before whose breath through greatness of his valour the two worlds trembled he o men is indra.
यः पर्थिवीं वयथमानामद्रंहद यः पर्वतान परकुपितानरम्णात|	he who fixed fast and firm the earth that staggered and set at rest the agitated mountains.
यो अन्तरिक्षं विममे वरीयो यो दयामस्तभ्नात स जनास इन्द्रः|	who measured out the airs wide middle region and gave the heaven support he men is indra.
यो हत्वाहिमरिणात सप्त सिन्धून यो गा उदाजदपधा वलस्य|	who slew the dragon freed the seven rivers and drove the kine forth from the cave of vala.
यो अश्मनोरन्तरग्निं जजान संव्र्क समत्सु स ज इ|	begat the fire between two stones the spoiler in warriors battle he o men is indra.
येनेमा विश्वा चयवना कर्तानि यो दासं वर्णमधरंगुहाकः|	by whom this universe was made to tremble who chased away the humbled brood of demons.
शवघ्नीव यो जिगीवान लक्षमाददर्यः पुष्टानि स ज इ|	who like a gambler gathering his winnings seized the foes riches he o men is indra.
यं समा पर्छन्ति कुह सेति घोरमुतेमाहुर्नैषो अस्तीत्येनम|	of whom the terrible they ask where is he or verily they say of him he is not.
सो अर्यः पुष्तीर्विज इवा मिनाति शरदस्मै धत्तस ज इ|	he sweeps away like birds the foes possessions have faith in him for he o men is indra.
यो रध्रस्य चोदिता यः कर्शस्य यो बरह्मणो नाधमानस्यकीरेः|	stirrer to action of the poor and lowly of priest of suppliant who sings his praises.
युक्तग्राव्णो योअविता सुशिप्रः सुतसोमस्य स ज इ|	who fairfaced favours him who presses soma with stones made ready he o men is indra.
यस्याश्वासः परदिशि यस्य गावो यस्य गरामा यस्य विश्वे रथासः|	he under whose supreme control are horses all chariots and the villages and cattle.
यः सूर्यं य उषसं जजान यो अपां नेता स ज इ|	he who gave being to the sun and morning who leads the waters he o men is indra.
यं करन्दसी संयती विह्वयेते परेअवर उभया अमित्राः|	to whom two armies cry in close encounter both enemies the stronger and the weaker.
समानं चिद रथमातस्थिवांसा नाना हवेते स ज इ|	whom two invoke upon one chariot mounted each for himself he o ye men is indra.
यस्मान न रते विजयन्ते जनासो यं युध्यमाना अवसे हवन्ते|	without whose help our people never conquer whom battling they invoke to give them succour.
यो विश्वस्य परतिमानं बभूव यो अच्युतच्युत स ज इ|	he of whom all this world is but the copy who shakes things moveless he o men is indra.
यः शश्वतो मह्येनो दधानानमन्यमानाञ्छर्वा जघान|	he who hath smitten ere they knew their danger with his hurled weapon many grievous sinners.
यः शर्धते नानुददाति शर्ध्यां यो दस्योर्हन्तास ज इ|	who pardons not his boldness who provokes him who slays the dasyu he o men is indra.
यः शम्बरं पर्वतेषु कषियन्तं चत्वारिंश्यां शरद्यन्वविन्दत|	he who discovered in the fortieth autumn Śambara as he dwelt among the mountains.
ओजायमानं यो अहिं जघान दानुं शयानंस ज इ|	who slew the dragon putting forth his vigour the demon lying there he men is indra.
यः सप्तरश्मिर्व्र्षभस्तुविष्मानवास्र्जत सर्तवे सप्तसिन्धून|	who with seven guiding reins the bull the mighty set free the seven great floods to flow at pleasure.
यो रौहिणमस्फुरद वज्रबाहुर्द्यामारोहन्तंस ज इ|	who thunderarmed rent rauhiṇa in pieces when scaling heaven he o ye men is indra.
दयावा चिदस्मै पर्थिवी नमेते शुष्माच्चिदस्य पर्वता भयन्ते|	even the heaven and earth bow down before him before his very breath the mountains tremble.
यः सोमपा निचितो वज्रबाहुर्यो वज्रहस्तः स ज इ|	known as the somadrinker armed with thunder who wields the bolt he o ye men is indra.
यः सुन्वन्तमवति यः पचन्तं यः शंसन्तं यः शशमानमूती|	who aids with favour him who pours the soma and him who brews it sacrificer singer.
यस्य बरह्म वर्धनं यस्य सोमो यस्येदं राधः स ज इ|	whom prayer exalts and pouring forth of soma and this our gift he o ye men is indra.
यः सुन्वते पचते दुध्र आ चिद वाजं दर्दर्षि स किलासि सत्यः|	thou verily art fierce and true who sendest strength to the man who brews and pours libation.
वयं त इन्द्र विश्वह परियासः सुवीरासो विदथमा वदेम|	so may we evermore thy friends o indra speak loudly to the synod with our heroes.
धारावरा मरुतो धर्ष्ण्वोजसो मर्गा न भीमास्तविषीभिरर्चिनः|	the maruts of resistless might who love the rain resplendent terrible like wild beasts in their strength.
अग्नयो न शुशुचाना रजीषिणो भर्मिं धमन्तोप गा अव्र्ण्वत|	glowing like flames of fire impetuous in career blowing the wandering raincloud have disclosed the kine.
दयावो न सत्र्भिश्चितयन्त खादिनो वयभ्रिया न दयुतयन्तव्र्ष्टयः|	they gleam with armlets as the heavens are decked with stars like cloudborn lightnings shine the torrents of their rain.
रुद्रो यद वो मरुतो रुक्मवक्षसो वर्षाजनि पर्श्न्याः शुक्र ऊधनि|	since the strong rudra o maruts with brilliant chests sprang into life for you in pṛśnis radiant lap.
उक्षन्ते अश्वानत्यानिवाजिषु नदस्य कर्णैस्तुरयन्त आशुभिः|	they drip like horses in the racings of swift steeds with the streams rapid cars they hasten on their way.
हिरण्यशिप्रा मरुतो दविध्वतः पर्क्षं याथ पर्षतीभिः समन्यवः|	maruts with helms of gold ye who make all things shake come with your spotted deer oneminded to our food.
पर्क्षे ता विश्वा भुवना ववक्षिरे मित्राय वा सदमा जीरदानवः|	they have bestowed of mitra all that live to feed they who for evermore cause their swift drops to flow.
पर्षदश्वासो अनवभ्रराधस रजिप्यासो न वयुनेषु धूर्षदः|	whose steeds are spotted deer whose riches never fail like horses in full speed bound to the pole in work.
इन्धन्वभिर्धेनुभी रप्शदूधभिरध्वस्मभिः पथिभिर्भ्राजद्र्ष्टयः|	with brightlyflaming kine whose udders swell with milk with glittering lances on your unobstructed paths.
आ हंसासो न सवसराणि गन्तन मधोर्मदाय मरुतः समन्यवः|	o maruts of one mind like swans who seek their nests come to the rapturous enjoyment of the meath.
आ नो बरह्माणि मरुतः समन्यवो नरां न शंसः सवनानि गन्तन|	to these our prayers o maruts come unanimous come ye to our libations like the praise of men.
अश्वामिव पिप्यत धेनुमूधनि कर्ता धियं जरित्रे वाजपेशसम|	make it swell like a mare in udder like a cow and for the singer grace the song with plenteous strength.
तं नो दात मरुतो वाजिनं रथ आपानं बरह्म चितयद दिवेदिवे|	give us a steed o maruts mighty in the car prevailing prayer that brings remembrance day by day.
इषं सतोत्र्भ्यो वर्जनेषु कारवे सनिं मेधामरिष्टं दुष्टरं सहः|	food to your praisers to your bard in deeds of might give winning wisdom power uninjured unsurpassed.
यद युञ्जते मरुतो रुक्मवक्षसोअश्वान रथेषु भग आ सुदानवः|	when the brightchested maruts lavish of their gifts bind at the time bliss their horses to the cars.
धेनुर्न शिश्वे सवसरेषु पिन्वते जनाय रातहविषे महीमिषम|	then as the milchcow feeds her calf within the stalls they pour forth food for all oblationbringing men.
यो नो मरुतो वर्कताति मर्त्यो रिपुर्दधे वसवो रक्षता रिषः|	save us o maruts vasus from the injurer the mortal foe who makes us looked upon as wolves.
वर्तयत तपुषा चक्रियाभि तमव रुद्रा अशसो हन्तना वधः|	with chariot all aflame compass him round about o rudras cast away the foemans deadly bolt.
चित्रं तद वो मरुतो याम चेकिते पर्श्न्या यदूधरप्यापयो दुहुः|	wellknown ye maruts is that wondrous course of yours when they milked pṛśnis udder close akin to her.
यद वा निदे नवमानस्य रुद्रियास्त्रितं जरायजुरतामदाभ्याः|	or when to shame the bard who lauded rudras sons ye o infallible brought trita to decay.
तान वो महो मरुत एवयाव्नो विष्णोरेषस्य परभ्र्थे हवामहे|	we call you such great maruts following wonted ways to the oblation paid to viṣṇu speederon.
हिरण्यवर्णान ककुहान यतस्रुचो बरह्मण्यन्तः शंस्यं राध ईमहे|	with ladles lifted up with prayer we seek of them preeminent goldenhued the wealth which all extol.
ते दशग्वाः परथमा यज्ञमूहिरे ते नो हिन्वन्तूषसो वयुष्टिषु|	they the daśagvas first of all brought sacrifice they at the break of mornings shall inspirit us.
उषा न रामीररुणैरपोर्णुते महो जयोतिषाशुचता गोर्णसा|	dawn with her purple beams uncovereth the nights with great light glowing like a billowy sea of milk.
ते कषोणीभिररुणेभिर्नाञ्जिभी रुद्रा रतस्य सदनेषुवाव्र्धुः|	the rudras have rejoiced them in the gathered bands at seats of worship as in purple ornaments.
निमेघमाना अत्येन पाजसा सुश्चन्द्रं वर्णन्दधिरे सुपेशसम|	they with impetuous vigour sending down the rain have taken to themselves a bright and lovely hue.
तानियानो महि वरूथमूतय उप घेदेना नमसा गर्णीमसि|	soliciting their high protection for our help with this our adoration we sing praise to them.
तरितो न यान पञ्च होतॄनभिष्टय आववर्तदवराञ्चक्रियावसे|	whom for assistance like the five terrestrial priests trita hath brought to aid us hither on his car.
यया रध्रं पारयथात्यंहो यया निदो मुञ्चथ वन्दितारम|	so may your favouring help be turned to usward your kindness like a lowing cow approach us.
अर्वाची सा मरुतो या व ऊतिरो षु वाश्रेव सुमतिर्जिगातु|	wherewith ye bear your servant over trouble and free your worshipper from scoff and scorning.
आ ते पितर्मरुतां सुम्नमेतु मा नः सूर्यस्य सन्द्र्षो युयोथाः|	father of maruts let thy bliss approach us exclude us not from looking on the sunlight.
अभि नो वीरो अर्वति कषमेत पर जायेमहि रुद्र परजाभिः|	gracious to our fleet courser be the hero may we transplant us rudra in our children.
तवादत्तेभी रुद्र शन्तमेभिः शतं हिमा अशीय भेषजेभिः|	with the most saving medicines which thou givest rudra may i attain a hundred winters.
वयस्मद दवेषो वितरं वयंहो वयमीवाश्चातयस्वा विषूचीः|	far from us banish enmity and hatred and to all quarters maladies and trouble.
शरेष्ठो जातस्य रुद्र शरियासि तवस्तमस्तवसां वज्रबाहो|	chief of all born art thou in glory rudra armed with the thunder mightiest of the mighty.
पर्षि णः पारमंहसः सवस्ति विश्वा अभीती रपसो युयोधि|	transport us over trouble to wellbeing repel thou from us all assaults of mischief.
मा तवा रुद्र चुक्रुधामा नमोभिर्मा दुष्टुती वर्षभ मासहूती|	let us not anger thee with worship rudra ill praise strong god or mingled invocation.
उन नो वीरानर्पय भेषजेभिर्भिषक्तमं तवा भिषजां शर्णोमि|	do thou with strengthening balms incite our heroes i hear thee famed as best of all physicians.
हवीमभिर्हवते यो हविर्भिरव सतोमेभी रुद्रं दिषीय|	may i with praisesongs win that rudras favour who is adored with gifts and invocations.
रदूदरः सुहवो मा नो अस्यै बभ्रुः सुशिप्रो रीरधन मनायै|	neer may the tawny god fairchecked and gracious swifthearing yield us to this evil purpose.
उन मा ममन्द वर्षभो मरुत्वान तवक्षीयसा वयसा नाधमानम|	the strong begirt by maruts hath refreshed me with most invigorating food imploring.
घर्णीव छायामरपा अशीया विवासेयं रुद्रस्य सुम्नम|	as he who finds a shade in fervent sunlight may i uninjured win the bliss of rudra.
कव सय ते रुद्र मर्ळयाकुर्हस्तो यो अस्ति भेषजो जलाषः|	where is that gracious hand of thine o rudra the hand that giveth health and bringeth comfort.
अपभर्ता रपसो दैव्यस्याभी नु मा वर्षभ चक्षमीथाः|	remover of the woe that gods have sent us o strong one look thou on me with compassion.
पर बभ्रवे वर्षभाय शवितीचे महो महीं सुष्टुतिमीरयामि|	to him the strong great tawny faircomplexioned i utter forth a mighty hymn of praises.
नमस्या कल्मलीकिनं नमोभिर्ग्र्णीमसि तवेषं रुद्रस्य नाम|	we serve the brilliant god with adorations we glorify the splendid name of rudra.
सथिरेभिरङगैः पुरुरूप उग्रो बभ्रुः शुक्रेभिः पिपिशेहिरण्यैः|	with firm limbs multiform the strong the tawny adorns himself with bright gold decorations.
ईशानादस्य भुवनस्य भूरेर्न वा उ योषद रुद्रादसुर्यम|	the strength of godhead neer departs from rudra him who is sovran of this world the mighty.
अर्हन बिभर्षि सायकानि धन्वार्हन निष्कं यजतं विश्वरूपम|	worthy thou carriest thy bow and arrows worthy thy manyhued and honoured necklace.
अर्हन्निदं दयसे विश्वमभ्वं न वा ओजीयो रुद्र तवदस्ति|	worthy thou cuttest here each fiend to pieces a mightier than thou there is not rudra.
सतुहि शरुतं गर्तसदं युवानं मर्गं न भीममुपहत्नुमुग्रम|	praise him the chariotborne the young the famous fierce slaying like a dread beast of the forest.
मर्ला जरित्रे रुद्र सतवानोअन्यं ते अस्मन नि वपन्तु सेनाः|	o rudra praised be gracious to the singer let thy hosts spare us and smite down another.
कुमारश्चित पितरं वन्दमानं परति नानाम रुद्रोपयन्तम|	i bend to thee as thou approachest rudra even as a boy before the sire who greets him.
भूरेर्दातारं सत्पतिं गर्णीषे सतुतस्त्वं भेषजा रास्यस्मे|	i praise thee bounteous giver lord of heroes give medicines to us as thou art lauded.
या वो भेषजा मरुतः शुचीनि या शन्तमा वर्षणो या मयोभु|	of your pure medicines o potent maruts those that are wholesomest and healthbestowing.
यानि मनुरव्र्णीता पिता नस्ता शं च योश्चरुद्रस्य वश्मि|	those which our father manu hath selected i crave from rudra for our gain and welfare.
परि णो हेती रुद्रस्य वर्ज्याः परि तवेषस्य दुर्मतिर्महीगात|	may rudras missile turn aside and spare us the great wrath of the impetuous one avoid us.
अव सथिरा मघवद्भ्यस्तनुष्व मीढ्वस्तोकाय तनयाय मर्ळ|	turn bounteous god thy strong bow from our princes and be thou gracious to our seed and offspring.
एवा बभ्रो वर्षभ चेकितान यथा देव न हर्णीषे न हंसि|	o tawny bull thus showing forth thy nature as neither to be wroth o god nor slay us.
हवनश्रुन नो रुद्रेह बोधि बर्हद व व स|	here rudra listen to our invocation loud may we speak with heroes in assembly.
उपेमस्र्क्षि वाजयुर्वचस्यां चनो दधीत नाद्यो गिरो मे|	eager for spoil my flow of speech i utter may the floods child accept my songs with favour.
अपां नपादाशुहेमा कुवित स सुपेशसस करति जोषिषद धि|	will not the rapid son of waters make them lovely for he it is who shall enjoy them.
इमं सवस्मै हर्द आ सुतष्टं मन्त्रं वोचेम कुविदस्य वेदत|	to him let us address the song wellfashioned forth from the heart shall he not understand it.
अपां नपादसुर्यस्य मह्ना विश्वान्यर्यो भुवना जजान|	the friendly son of waters by the greatness of godhead hath produced all things existing.
समन्या यन्त्युप यन्त्यन्याः समानमूर्वं नद्यः पर्णन्ति|	some floods unite themselves and others join them die sounding rivers fill one common storehouse.
तमू शुचिं शुचयो दीदिवांसमपां नपातं परि तस्थुरापः|	on every side the bright floods have encompassed the bright resplendent offspring of the waters.
तमस्मेरा युवतयो युवानं मर्म्र्ज्यमानाः परि यन्त्यापः|	the neversullen waters youthful maidens carefully decking wait on him the youthful.
स शुक्रेभिः शिक्वभी रेवदस्मे दीदायानिध्मो घर्तनिर्णिगप्सु|	he with bright rays shines forth in splendid beauty unfed with wood in waters oilenveloped.
अस्मै तिस्रो अव्यथ्याय नारीर्देवाय देवीर्दिधिषन्त्यन्नम|	to him three dames are offering food to feed him goddesses to the god whom none may injure.
कर्ता इवोप हि परसर्स्रे अप्सु स पीयूषं धयति पूर्वसूनाम|	within the waters hath he pressed as hollows and drinks their milk who now are first made mothers.
अश्वस्यात्र जनिमास्य च सवर्द्रुहो रिषः सम्प्र्चः पाहिसूरीन|	here was the horses birth his was the sunlight save thou our princes from the oppressors onslaught.
आमासु पूर्षु परो अप्रम्र्ष्यं नारातयो वि नशन नान्र्तानि|	him indestructible dwelling at a distance in forts unwrought lies and ill spirits reach not.
सव आ दमे सुदुघा यस्य धेनुः सवधां पीपाय सुभ्वन्नमत्ति|	he in whose mansion is the teeming milchcow swells the gods nectar and cats noble viands.
सो अपां नपादूर्जयन्नप्स्वन्तर्वसुदेयाय विधते वि भाति|	the son of waters gathering strength in waters shines for his worshipper to give him treasures.
यो अप्स्वा सुचिना दैव्येन रतावाजस्र उर्विया विभाति|	he who in waters with his own pure godhead shines widely lawabiding everlasting.
वया इदन्या भुवनान्यस्य पर जायन्ते वीरुधश्च परजाभिः|	the other worlds are verily his branches and plants are born of him with all their offspring.
अपां नपादा हयस्थादुपस्थं जिह्मानामूर्ध्वो विद्युतं वसानः|	the waters son hath risen and clothed in lightning ascended up unto the curled clouds bosom.
तस्य जयेष्ठं महिमानं वहन्तीर्हिरण्यवर्णाः परि यन्ति यह्वीः|	and bearing with them his supremest glory the youthful ones goldcoloured move around him.
हिरण्यरूपः स हिरण्यसन्द्र्गपां नपात सेदु हिरण्यवर्णः|	golden in form is he like gold to look on his colour is like gold the son of waters.
हिरण्ययात परि योनेर्निषद्या हिरण्यदा ददत्यन्नमस्मै|	when he is seated fresh from golden birthplace those who present their gold give food to feed him.
तदस्यानीकमुत चारु नामापीच्यं वर्धते नप्तुरपाम|	this the fair name and this the lovely aspect of him the waters son increase in secret.
यमिन्धते युवतयः समित्था हिरण्यवर्णं घर्तमन्नमस्य|	whom here the youthful maids together kindle his food is sacred oil of golden colour.
अस्मै बहूनामवमाय सख्ये यज्ञैर्विधेम नमसा हविर्भिः|	him nearest friend of many will we worship with sacrifice and reverence and oblation.
सं सानु मार्ज्मि दिधिषामि बिल्मैर्दधाम्यन्नैःपरि वन्द रग्भिः|	i make his back to shine with chips provide him i offer food and with my songs exalt him.
स ईं वर्षाजनयत तासु गर्भं स ईं सिशुर्धयति तं रिहन्ति|	the bull hath laid his own lifegerm within them he sucks them as an infant and they kiss him.
सो अपां नपादनभिम्लातवर्णोअन्यस्येवेह तन्वा विवेष|	he son of waters of unfading colour hath entered here as in anothers body.
अस्मिन पदे परमे तस्थिवांसमध्वस्मभिर्विश्वहा दीदिवांसाम|	while here he dwelleth in sublimest station resplendent with the rays that never perish.
आपो नप्त्रे घर्तमन्नं वहन्तीः सवयमत्कैः परि दीयन्ति यह्वीः|	the waters bearing oil to feed their offspring flow youthful ones in wanderings about him.
अयांसमग्ने सुक्षितिं जनायायांसमु मघवद्भ्यः सुव्र्क्तिम|	agni i gave good shelter to the people and to the princes goodly preparation.
विश्वं तद|	blessed is all that gods regard with favour loud may we speak with heroes in assembly.
गरावाणेव तदिदथं जरेथे गर्ध्रेव वर्क्षं निधिमन्तमछ|	sing like the two pressstones for this same purpose come like two misers to the tree of treasure.
बरह्माणेव विदथ उक्थशासा दूतेव हव्या जन्या पुरुत्रा|	like two laudsinging brahmans in the assembly like the folks envoys called in many places.
परातर्यावाणा रथ्येव वीराजेव यमा वरमा सचेथे|	moving at morning like two carborne heroes like to a pair of goats ye come electing.
मेने इव तन्वा शुम्भमाने दम्पतीव करतुविदा जनेषु|	like two fair dames embellishing their bodies like a wise married pair among the people.
शर्ङगेव नः परथमा गन्तमर्वाक छफाविव जर्भुराणातरोभिः|	like to a pair of horns come first to usward like to a pair of hoofs with rapid motion.
चक्रवाकेव परति वस्तोरुस्रार्वाञ्चा यातं रथ्येव शक्रा|	come like two cakavās in the grey of morning come like two chariot wheels at dawn ye mighty.
नावेव नः पारयतं युगेव नभ्येव न उपधीव परधीव|	bear us across the rivers like two vessels save us as ye were yokes naves spokes and fellies.
शवानेव नो अरिषण्या तनूनां खर्गलेव विस्रसः पातमस्मान|	be like two dogs that injure not our bodies preserve us like two crutches that we fall not.
वातेवाजुर्या नद्येव रीतिरक्षी इव चक्षुषा यातमर्वाक|	like two winds ageing not two confluent rivers come with quick vision like two eyes before us.
हस्ताविव तन्वे शम्भविष्ठा पादेव नो नयतं वस्यो अछ|	come like two hands most helpful to the body and guide us like two feet to what is precious.
ओष्ठाविव मध्वास्ने वदन्ता सतनाविव पिप्यतं जीवसेनः|	even as two lips that with the mouth speak honey even as two breasts that nourish our existence.
नासेव नस्तन्वो रक्षितारा कर्णाविव सुश्रुता भूतमस्मे|	like the two nostrils that protect our being be to us as our ears that hear distinctly.
हस्तेव शक्तिमभि सन्ददी नः कषामेव नः समजतं रजांसि|	like two hands give ye us increasing vigour like heaven and earth constrain the airy regions.
इमा गिरो अश्विना युष्मयन्तीः कष्णोत्रेणेव सवधितिं सं शिशीतम|	aśvins these hymns that struggle to approach you sharpen ye like an axe upon a whetstone.
एतानि वामश्विना वर्धनानि बरह्म सतोमं गर्त्समदासो अक्रन|	these prayers of ours exalting you o aśvins have the gṛtsamadas for a laud made ready.
तानि नरा जुजुषाणोप यातं बर्हद|	welcome them o ye heroes and come hither loud may we speak with brave men in assembly.
रजुरिच्छंसो वनवद वनुष्यतो देवयन्निददेवयन्तमभ्यसत|	the righteous singer shall oercome his enemies and he who serves the gods subdue the godless man.
सुप्रावीरिद वनवत पर्त्सु दुष्टरं यज्वेदयज्योर्वि भजाति भोजनम|	the zealous man shall vanquish the invincible the worshipper share the food of him who worships not.
यजस्व वीर पर विहि मनायतो भद्रं मनः कर्णुष्व वर्त्रतूर्ये|	worship thou hero chase the arrogant afar put on auspicious courage for the fight with foes.
हविष कर्णुष्व सुभगो यथाससि बरह्मणस पतेरव आ वर्णीमहे|	prepare oblation so that thou mayst have success we crave the favouring help of brahmaṇaspati.
स इज्जनेन स विशा स जन्मना स पुत्रैर्वाजं भरतेधना नर्भिः|	he with his folk his house his family his sons gains booty for himself and with the heroes wealth.
देवानां यः पितरमाविवासति शरद्धामना हविषा बरह्मणस पतिम|	who with oblation and a true believing heart serves brahmaṇaspati the father of the gods.
यो अस्मै हव्यैर्घ्र्तवद्भिरविधत पर तं पराचा नयति बरह्मणस पतिः|	whoso hath honoured him with offerings rich in oil him brahmaṇaspati leads forward on his way.
उरुष्यतीमंहसो रक्षती रिषोअंहोश्चिदस्मा उरुचक्रिरद्भुतः|	saves him from sorrow frees him from his enemy and is his wonderful deliverer from woe.
वाजयन्निव नू रथान योगानग्नेरुप सतुहि|	now praise as one who strives for strength the harnessing of agnis car.
यशस्तमस्य मीळ्हुषः|	the liberal the most splendid one.
यः सुनीथो ददाशुषेअजुर्यो जरयन्नरिम|	who guiding worshippers aright withers untouched by age the foe.
चारुप्रतीकाहुतः|	when worshipped fair to look upon.
य उ शरिया दमेष्वा दोषोषसि परशस्यते|	who for his glory is extolled at eve and morning in our homes.
यस्य वरतं न मीयते|	whose statute is inviolate.
आ यः सवर्ण भानुना चित्रो विभात्यर्चिषा|	who shines refulgent like the sun with brilliance and with fiery flame.
अञ्जानोजरैरभि|	decked with imperishable sheen.
अत्रिमनु सवराज्यमग्निमुक्थानि वाव्र्धुः|	him atri agni have our songs strengthened according to his sway.
विश्वा अधि शरियो दधे|	all glories hath he made his own.
अग्नेरिन्द्रस्य सोमस्य देवानामूतिभिर्वयम|	may we with agnis indras help with somas yea of all the gods.
अरिष्यन्तःसचेमह्यभि षयाम पर्तन्यतः|	uninjured dwell together still and conquer those who fight with us.
रतं देवाय कर्ण्वते सवित्र इन्द्रायाहिघ्ने न रमन्त आपः|	the streams unceasing flow to indra slayer of ahi savitar god laws fulfiller.
अहरअहर्यात्यक्तुरपां कियात्या परथमः सर्ग आसाम|	day after day goes on the sheen of waters what time hath past since they were first set flowing.
यो वर्त्राय सिनमत्राभरिष्यत पर तं जनित्री विदुष उवाच|	his motherfor she knewspake and proclaimed him who was about to cast his bolt at vṛtra.
पथो रदन्तीरनु जोषमस्मै दिवेदिवे धुनयो यन्त्यर्थम|	cutting their paths according to his pleasure day after day flow to their goal the rivers.
ऊर्ध्वो हयस्थादध्यन्तरिक्षेअधा वर्त्राय पर वधंजभार|	aloft he stood above the airy region and against vṛtra shot his deadly missile.
मिहं वसान उप हीमदुद्रोत तिग्मायुधो अजयच्छत्रुमिन्द्रः|	enveloped in a cloud he rushed upon him indra subdued the foe with sharpened weapons.
बर्हस्पते तपुषाश्नेव विध्य वर्कद्वरसो असुरस्य वीरान|	as with a bolt bṛhaspati fiercely flaming pierce thou vṛkadvaras the asuras heroes.
यथा जघन्थ धर्षता पुरा चिदेवा जहि शत्रुमस्माकमिन्द्र|	even as in time of old with might thou slewest so slay even now our enemy o indra.
अव कषिप दिवो अश्मानमुच्चा येन शत्रुं मन्दसानो निजूर्वाः|	cast down from heaven on high thy bolt of thunder wherewith in joy thou smitest dead the foeman.
तोकस्य सातौ तनयस्य भूरेरस्मानर्धं कर्णुतादिन्द्र गोनाम|	for gain of children make us thine o indra of many childrens children and of cattle.
पर हि करतुं वर्हथो यं वनुथो रध्रस्य सथो यजमानस्य चोदौ|	whomso ye love his power ye aid and strengthen ye twain are the rich worshippers advancers.
इन्द्रासोमा युवमस्मानविष्टमस्मिन भयस्थे कर्णुतमु लोकम|	graciously favour us indra and soma give us firm standing in this time of danger.
न मा तमन न शरमन नोत तन्द्रन न वोचाम मा सुनोतेति सोमम|	let it not vex me tire me make me slothful and never let us say press not the soma.
यो मे पर्णाद यो ददद यो निबोधाद यो मा सुन्वन्तमुप गोभिरायत|	for him who cares for me gives gifts supports me who comes with kine to me who pour libations.
सरस्वति तवमस्मानविड्ढि मरुत्वती धर्षती जेषि शत्रून|	sarasvatī protect us with the maruts allied thou boldly conquerest our foemen.
तयं चिच्छर्धन्तं तविषीयमाणमिन्द्रो हन्ति वर्षभं शण्डिकानाम|	while indra does to death the daring chieftain of Śaṇḍikas exulting in his prowess.
यो नः सनुत्य उत वा जिघत्नुरभिख्याय तं तिगितेन विध्य|	him who waylays yea him who would destroy usaim at him pierce him with thy sharpened weapon.
बर्हस्पत आयुधैर्जेषि शत्रून दरुहे रीषन्तं परि धेहि राजन|	bṛhaspati with arms thou slayest foemen o king give up the spoiler to destruction.
अस्माकेभिः सत्वभिः शूर शूरैर्वीर्य कर्धि यानि ते कर्त्वानि|	perform o hero with our valiant heroes the deeds heroic which thou hast to finish.
जयोगभूवन्ननुधूपितासो हत्वी तेशामा भरानो वसूनि|	long have they been inflated with presumption slay them and bring us hither their possessions.
तं वः शर्धं मारुतं सुम्नयुर्गिरोप बरुवे नमसा दैव्यं जनम|	i craving joy address with hymn and homage your heavenly host the company of maruts.
यथा रयिं सर्ववीरं नशामहा अपत्यसाचं शरुत्यं दिवेदिवे|	that we may gain wealth with full store of heroes each day more famous and with troops of children.
सोमापूषणा जनना रयीणां जनना दिवो जनना पर्थिव्याः|	soma and pūṣan parents of all riches parents of earth and parents of high heaven.
जातौ विश्वस्य भुवनस्य गोपौ देवा अक्र्ण्वन्नम्र्तस्य नाभिम|	you twain brought forth as the whole worlds protectors the gods have made centre of life eternal.
इमौ देवौ जायमानौ जुषन्तेमौ तमांसि गूहतामजुष्टा|	at birth of these two gods all gods are joyful they have caused darkness which we hate to vanish.
आभ्यामिन्द्रः पक्वमामास्वन्तः सोमापूषभ्यां जनदुस्रियासु|	with these with soma and with pūṣan india generates ripe warm milk in the raw milchcows.
सोमापूषणा रजसो विमानं सप्तचक्रं रथमविश्वमिन्वम|	soma and pūṣan urge your chariot hither the sevenwheeled car that measures out the region.
विषूव्र्तं मनसा युज्यमानं तं जिन्वथो वर्षणा पञ्चरश्मिम|	that stirs not all that moves to every quarter fivereined and harnessed by the thought ye mighty.
दिव्यन्यः सदनं चक्र उच्चा पर्थिव्यामन्यो अध्यन्तरिक्षे|	one in the heaven on high hath made his dwelling on earth and in the firmament the other.
तावस्मभ्यं पुरुवारं पुरुक्षुं रायस पोषं वि षयतां नाभिमस्मे|	may they disclose to us great store of treasure muchlonged for rich in food source of enjoyment.
विश्वान्यन्यो भुवना जजान विश्वमन्यो अभिचक्षाण एति|	one of you twain is parent of all creatures the other journeys onward allbeholding.
सोमापूषणाववतं धियं मे युवाभ्यां विश्वाः पर्तना जयेम|	soma and pūṣan aid my thought with favour with you may we o’ercome in all encounters.
धियं पूषा जिन्वतु विश्वमिन्वो रयिं सोमो रयिपतिर्दधातु|	may pūṣan stir our thought the allimpelling may soma lord of riches grant us riches.
अवतु देव्यदितिरनर्वा बर|	may aditi the perfect goddess aid us loud may we speak with heroes in assembly.
विश्वजिते धनजिते सवर्जिते सत्राजिते नर्जित उर्वराजिते|	to him the lord of all the lord of wealth of light him who is lord for ever lord of men and tilth.
अश्वजिते गोजिते अब्जिते भरेन्द्राय सोमं यजताय हर्यतम|	him who is lord of horses lord of kine of floods to indra to the holy bring sweet soma juice.
अभिभुवेअभिभङगाय वन्वतेअषाळ्हाय सहमानाय वेधसे|	to him the potent one who conquers and breaks down the victor never vanquished who disposes all.
तुविग्रये वह्नये दुष्टरीतवे सत्रासाहे नम इन्द्राय वोचत|	the mightyvoiced the rider unassailable to indra everconquering speak your reverent prayer.
सत्रासाहो जनभक्षो जनंसहश्च्यवनो युध्मो अनु जोषमुक्षितः|	still victor loved by mortals ruler over men oerthrower warrior he hath waxen as he would.
वर्तंचयः सहुरिर्विक्ष्वारित इन्द्रस्य वोचं पर कर्तानि वीर्या|	hostgatherer triumphant honoured mid the folk indras heroic deeds will i tell forth to all.
अनानुदो वर्षभो दोधतो वधो गम्भीर रष्वो असमष्टकाव्यः|	the strong who never yields who slew the furious fiend the deep the vast of wisdom unattainable.
रध्रचोदः शनथनो वीळितस पर्थुरिन्द्रः सुयज्ञ उषसः सवर्जनत|	who speeds the good the breakerdown the firm the vastindra whose rites bring joy hath made the light of dawn.
यज्णेन गातुमप्तुरो विविद्रिरे धियो हिन्वाना उशिजो मनीषिणः|	by sacrifice the yearning sages sending forth their songs found furtherance from him who speeds the flood.
अभिस्वरा निषदा गा अवस्यव इन्द्रे हिन्वाना दरविणान्याशत|	in indra seeking help with worship and with hymn they drew him to themselves and won them kine and wealth.
इन्द्र शरेष्ठानि दरविणानि धेहि चित्तिं दक्षस्य सुभगत्वं अस्मे|	indra bestow on us the best of treasures the spirit of ability and fortune.
पोषं रयीणामरिष्टिं तनूनां सवाद्मानं वाचः सुदिनत्वमह्नाम|	increase of riches safety of our bodies charm of sweet speech and days of pleasant weather.
इमां मे अग्ने समिधमिमामुपसदं वनेः|	agni accept this flaming brand this waiting with my prayer on thee.
इमा उ षु शरुधी गिरः|	hear graciously these songs of praise.
अया ते अग्ने विधेमोर्जो नपादश्वमिष्टे|	with this hymn let us honour thee seeker of horses son of strength.
एना सूक्तेन सुजात|	with this fair hymn thou nobly born.
तं तवा गीर्भिर्गिर्वणसं दरविणस्युं दरविणोदः|	as such lover of song with songs wealthlover giver of our wealth.
सपर्येम सपर्यवः|	with reverence let us worship thee.
स बोधि सूरिर्मघवा वसुपते वसुदावन|	be thou for us a liberal prince giver and lord of precious things.
युयोध्यस्मद दवेषांसि|	drive those who hate us far away.
स नो वर्ष्तिं दिवस परि स नो वाजमनर्वाणम|	such as thou art give rain from heaven give strength which no man may resist.
स नः सहस्रिणीरिषः|	give food exceeding plentiful.
ईळानायावस्यवे यविष्ठ दूत नो गिरा|	to him who lauds thee craving help most youthful envoy through our song.
यजिष्ठ होतरा गहि|	most holy herald come thou nigh.
अन्तर्ह्यग्न ईयसे विद्वान जन्मोभया कवे|	between both races agni sage well skilled thou passest to and fro.
दूतो जन्येवमित्र्यः|	as envoy friendly to mankind.
स विद्वाना च पिप्रयो यक्षि चिकित्व आनुषक|	befriend us thou as knowing all sage duly worship thou the gods.
आ चास्मिन सत्सि बर्हिषि|	and seat thee on this sacred grass.
वायो ये ते सहस्रिणो रथासस्तेभिरा गहि|	o vĀyu come to us with all the thousand chariots that are thine.
नियुत्वान सोमपीतये|	teamborne to drink the soma juice.
नियुत्वान वायवा गह्ययं शुक्रो अयामि ते|	drawn by thy team o vāyu come to thee is offered this the pure.
गन्तासि सुन्वतो गर्हम|	thou visitest the pressers house.
शुक्रस्याद्य गवाशिर इन्द्रवायू नियुत्वतः|	indra and vāyu drawn by teams ye heroes come today and drink.
आ यातं पिबतं नरा|	of the bright juice when blent with milk.
अयं वां मित्रावरुणा सुतः सोम रताव्र्धा|	this soma hath been shed for you lawstrengtheners mitravaruṇa.
ममेदिह शरुतं हवम|	listen ye here to this my call.
राजानावनभिद्रुहा धरुवे सदस्युत्तमे|	both kings who never injure aught seat them in their supremest home.
सहस्रस्थूण आसाते|	the thousandpillared firmlybased.
ता सम्राजा घर्तासुती आदित्या दानुनस पती|	fed with oblation sovran kings Ādityas lords of liberal gifts.
सचेते अनवह्वरम|	they wait on him whose life is true.
गोमदू षु नासत्याश्वावद यातमश्विना|	with kine nāsatyas and with steeds come aśvins rudras to the house.
वर्ती रुद्रा नर्पाय्यम|	that will protect its heroes well.
न यत परो नान्तर आदधर्षद वर्षण्वसू|	such wealthy gods as none afar nor standing nigh to us may harm.
दुःशंसो मर्त्यो रिपुः|	yea no malicious mortal foe.
ता न आ वोळ्हमश्विना रयिं पिशङगसन्द्र्शम|	as such o longedfar aśvins lead us on to wealth of varied sort.
धिष्न्यावरिवोविदम|	wealth that shall bring us room and rest.
इन्द्रो अङग महद भयमभी षदप चुच्यवत|	verily indra conquering all driveth een mighty fear away.
स हि सथिरो विचर्षणिः|	for firm is he and swift to act.
इन्द्रश्च मर्ळयाति नो न नः पश्चादघं नशत|	indra be gracious unto us sin shall not reach us afterward.
भद्रं भवाति नः पुरः|	and good shall be before us still.
इन्द्र आशाभ्यस परि सर्वाभ्यो अभयं करत|	from all the regions of the world let indra send security.
जेता शत्रून विचर्शणिः|	the foesubduer swift to act.
विश्वे देवास आ गत शर्णुता म इमं हवम|	o all ye gods come hitherward hear this mine invocation seat.
एदं बर्हिर्नि षीदत|	yourselves upon this sacred grass.
तीव्रो वो मधुमानयं शुनहोत्रेषु मत्सरः|	among the Śunahotras strong for you is this sweet gladdening draught.
एतं पिबतकाम्यम|	drink ye of this delightsome juice.
इन्द्रज्येष्ठा|	ye maruts led by indra gods with pūṣan for your bounteousest.
अम्बितमे नदीतमे देवितमे सरस्वति|	hear all of you this call of mine.
अप्रशस्ता इव समसि परशस्तिमम्ब नस कर्धि|	best mother best of rivers best of goddesses sarasvatī we are as twere of no repute and dear mother give thou us renown.
तवे विश्वा सरस्वति शरितायूंषि देव्याम|	in thee sarasvatī divine all generations have their stay.
शुनहोत्रेषु मत्स्व परजां देवि दिदिड्ढि नः|	be glad with Śunahotras sons o goddess grant us progeny.
इमा बरह्म सरस्वति जुषस्व वाजिनीवति|	enriched with sacrifice accept sarasvatī these prayers of ours.
या ते मन्म गर्त्समदा रतावरि परिया देवेषु जुह्वति|	thoughts which gṛtsamadas beloved of gods bring holy one to thee.
परेतां यज्ञस्य शम्भुवा युवामिदा वर्णीमहे|	ye who bless sacrifice go forth for verily we choose you both.
अग्निंच हव्यवाहनम|	and agni who conveys our gifts.
दयावा नः पर्थिवी इमं सिध्रमद्य दिविस्प्र्शम|	this our effectual sacrifice reaching the sky shall heaven and earth.
यज्णन्देवेषु यछताम|	present unto the gods today.
आ वामुपस्थमद्रुहा देवाः सीदन्तु यज्ञियाः|	in both your laps ye guileless ones the holy gods shall sit them down.
इहाद्यसोमपीतये|	today to drink the soma here.
नि होता होत्र्षदने विदानस्त्वेषो दीदिवानसदत सुदक्षः|	accustomed to the heralds place the herald hath seated him bright splendid passing mighty.
अदब्धव्रतप्रमतिर्वसिष्ठः सहस्रम्भरः शुचिजिह्वो अग्निः|	whose foresight keeps the law from violation excellent puretongued bringing thousands agni.
तवं दूतस्त्वमु नः परस्पास्त्वं वस्य आ वर्षभ परणेता|	envoy art thou protector from the foeman strong god thou leadest us to higher blessings.
अग्ने तोकस्य नस्तने तनूनामप्रयुछन दीद्यद बोधि गोपाः|	refulgent be an everheedful keeper agni for us and for our seed offspring.
विधेम ते परमे जन्मन्नग्ने विधेम सतोमैरवरे सधस्थे|	may we adore thee in thy loftiest birthplace and with our praises in thy lower station.
यस्माद योनेरुदारिथा यजे तं पर तवे हवींषि जुहुरेसमिद्धे|	the place whence thou issued forth i worship to thee well kindled have they paid oblations.
अग्ने यजस्व हविषा यजीयाञ्छ्रुष्टी देष्णमभि गर्णीहि राधः|	agni best priest pay worship with oblation quickly commend the gift to be presented.
तवं हयसि रयिपती रयीणां तवं शुक्रस्य वचसो मनोता|	for thou art lord of gathered wealth and treasure of the bright song of praise thou art inventor.
उभयं ते न कषीयते वसव्यं दिवेदिवे जायमानस्य दस्म|	the twofold opulence o wonderworker of thee newborn each day never decreases.
कर्धि कषुमन्तं जरितारमग्ने कर्धि पतिं सवपत्यस्य रायः|	enrich with food the man who lauds thee agni make him the lord of wealth with noble offspring.
सैनानीकेन सुविदत्रो अस्मे यष्टा देवानायजिष्ठः सवस्ति|	may he benevolent with this fair aspect best sacrificer bring the gods to bless us.
अदब्धो गोपा उत नः परस्पा अग्ने दयुमदुत रेवद दिदीहि|	sure guardian our protector from the foemen shine agni with thine affluence and splendour.
तुभ्यं हिन्वानो वसिष्ट गा अपोअधुक्षन सीमविभिरद्रिभिर्नरः|	water and milk hath he endued sent forth to thee the men have drained him with the filters and the stones.
पिबेन्द्र सवाहा परहुतं वषत्क्र्तं होत्रादासोमं परथमो य ईशिषे|	drink indra from the hotars bowlfirst right is thinesoma hallowed and poured with vaṣaṭ and svāhā.
यज्ञैः सम्मिश्लाः पर्षतीभिर्र्ष्टिभिर्यामञ्छुभ्रासो अञ्जिषु परिया उत|	busied with sacrifice with spotted deer and spears gleaming upon your way with ornaments yea our friends.
आसद्या बर्हिर्भरतस्य सूनवः पोत्रादा सोमं पिबता दिवो नरः|	sitting on sacred grass ye sons of bhārata drink soma from the potars bowl o men of heaven.
अमेव नः सुहवा आ हि गन्तन नि बर्हिषि सदतना रणिष्टन|	come unto us ye swift to listen as at home upon the sacred grass sit and enjoy yourselves.
अथा मन्दस्व जुजुषाणो अन्धसस्त्वष्टर्देवेभिर्जनिभिः सुमद्गणः|	and tvaṣṭar wellcontent be joyful in the juice with gods and goddesses in gladsome company.
आ वक्षि देवानिह विप्र यक्षि चोशन होतर्नि षदा योनिषु तरिषु|	bring the gods hither sage and offer sacrifice at the three altars seat thee willingly o priest.
परति वीहि परस्थितं सोम्यं मधु पिबाग्नीध्रात्तव भागस्य तर्प्णुहि|	accept for thy delight the proffered soma meath drink from the kindlers bowl and fill thee with thy share.
एष सय ते तन्वो नर्म्णवर्धनः सह ओजः परदिवि बाह्वोर्हितः|	this is the strengthener of thy bodys manly might strength victory for all time are placed within thine arms.
तुभ्यं सुतो मघवन तुभ्यमाभ्र्तस्त्वमस्य बराह्मनादा तर्पत पिब|	pressed for thee maghavan it is offered unto thee drink from the chalice of this brahman drink thy fill.
जुषेथां यज्ञं बोधतं हवस्य मे सत्तो होता निविदः पूर्व्या अनु|	accept the sacrifice mark both of you my call the priest hath seated him after the ancient texts.
अछा राजाना नम एत्याव्र्तं परशास्त्रादा पिबतं सोम्यं मधु|	my prayer that bids them come goes forth to both the kings drink ye the soma meath from the directors bowl.
शरुधी हवमिन्द्र मा रिशण्यः सयाम ते दावने वसूनाम|	hear thou my call o indra be not heedless thine may we be for thee to give us treasures.
इमा हि तवामूर्जो वर्धयन्ति वसूयवः सिन्धवो न कषरन्तः|	for these presented viands seeking riches increase thy strength like streams of water flowing.
सर्जो महीरिन्द्र या अपिन्वः परिष्ठिता अहिना शूर पूर्वीः|	floods great and many compassed by the dragon thou badest swell and settest free o hero.
अमर्त्यं चिद दासं मन्यमानमवाभिनदुक्थैर्वाव्र्धानः|	strengthened by songs of praise thou rentest piecemeal the dāsa him who deemed himself immortal.
उक्थेष्विन नु शूर येषु चाकन सतोमेष्विन्द्र रुद्रियेषु च|	for hero in the lauds wherein thou joyedst in hymns of praise o indra songs of rudras.
तुभ्येदेता यासु मन्दसानः पर वायवे सिस्रते न शुभ्राः|	these streams in which is thy delight approach thee even as the brilliant ones draw near to vāyu.
शुभ्रं नु ते शुष्मं वर्धयन्तः शुभ्रं वज्रं बाह्वोर्दधानाः|	we who add strength to thine own splendid vigour laying within thine arms the splendid thunder.
शुभ्रस्त्वमिन्द्र वाव्र्धानो अस्मे दासीर्विशः सूर्येण सह्याः|	with us mayst thou o indra waxen splendid with sūrya overcome the dāsa races.
गुहा हितं गुह्यं गूळ्हमप्स्वपीव्र्तं मायिनं कषियन्तम|	hero thou slewest in thy valour ahi concealed in depths mysterious great enchanter.
उतो अपो दयां तस्तभ्वांसमहन्नहिं शूर वीर्येण|	dwelling enveloped deep within the waters him who checked heaven and stayed the floods from flowing.
सतवा नु त इन्द्र पूर्व्या महान्युत सतवाम नूतना कर्तानि|	indra we laud thy great deeds wrought aforetime we laud thine exploits later of achievement.
सतवा वज्रं बाह्वोरुशन्तं सतवा हरी सूर्यस्य केतू|	we laud the bolt that in thine arms lies eager we laud thy two bay steeds heralds of sūrya.
हरी नु त इन्द्र वाजयन्ता घर्तश्चुतं सवारमस्वार्ष्टाम|	indra thy bay steeds showing forth their vigour have sent a loud cry out that droppeth fatness.
वि समना भूमिरप्रथिष्टारंस्त पर्वतश्चित सरिष्यन|	the earth hath spread herself in all her fulness the cloud that was about to move hath rested.
नि पर्वतः साद्यप्रयुछन सं मात्र्भिर्वावशानो अक्रान|	down never ceasing hath the raincloud settled bellowing it hath wandered with the mothers.
दूरे पारे वाणीं वर्धयन्त इन्द्रेषितां धमनिं पप्रथन नि|	swelling the roar in the far distant limits they have spread wide the blast sent forth by indra.
इन्द्रो महां सिन्धुमाशयानं मायाविनं वर्त्रमस्फुरन निः|	indra hath hurled down the magician vṛtra who lay beleaguering the mighty river.
अरेजेतां रोदसी भियाने कनिक्रदतो वर्ष्णो अस्य वज्रात|	then both the heaven and earth trembled in terror at the strong heros thunder when he bellowed.
अरोरवीद वर्ष्णो अस्य वज्रोअमानुषं यन मानुषो निजूर्वात|	loud roared the mighty heros bolt of thunder when he the friend of man burnt up the monster.
नि मायिनो दानवस्य माया अपादयत पपिवान सुतस्य|	and having drunk his fill of flowing soma baffled the guileful dānavas devices.
पिबापिबेदिन्द्र शूर सोमं मन्दन्तु तवा मन्दिनः सुतासः|	drink thou o hero indra drink the soma let the joygiving juices make thee joyful.
पर्णन्तस्ते कुक्षी वर्धयन्त्वित्था सुतः पौर इन्द्रमाव|	they filling both thy flanks shall swell thy vigour the juice that satisfies hath helped indra.
तवे इन्द्राप्यभूम विप्रा धियं वनेम रतया सपन्तः|	singers have we become with thee o indra may we serve duly and prepare devotion.
अवस्यवो धीमहि परशस्तिं सद्यस्ते रायो दावने सयाम|	seeking thy help we meditate thy praises may we at once enjoy thy gift of riches.
सयाम ते त इन्द्र ये त ऊती अवस्यव ऊर्जं वर्धयन्तः|	may we be thine such by thy help o indra as swell thy vigour while they seek thy favour.
शुष्मिन्तमं यं चाकनाम देवास्मे रयिं रासि वीरवन्तम|	give us thou god the riches that we long for most powerful with stare of noble children.
रासि कषयं रासि मित्रमस्मे रासि शर्ध इन्द्र मारुतंनः|	give us a friend give us an habitation indra give us the company of maruts.
सजोषसो ये च मन्दसानाः पर वायवः पान्त्यग्रणीतिम|	and those whose minds accord with theirs the vāyus who drink the first libation of the soma.
वयन्त्विन नु येषु मन्दसानस्त्र्पत सोमं पाहि दरह्यदिन्द्र|	let those enjoy in whom thou art delighted indra drink soma for thy strength and gladness.
अस्मान सु पर्त्स्वा तरुत्रावर्धयो दयां बर्हद्भिरर्कैः|	thou hast exalted us to heaven preserver in battles through the lofty hymns that praise thee.
बर्हन्त इन नु ये ते तरुत्रोक्थेभिर्वा सुम्नमाविवासान|	great verily are they o thou protector who by their songs of praise have won the blessing.
सत्र्णानासो बर्हिः पस्त्यावत तवोता इदिन्द्र वाजमग्मन|	they who strew sacred grass to be thy dwelling helped by thee have got them strength o indra.
उग्रेष्विन नु शूर मन्दसानस्त्रिकद्रुकेषु पाहि सोममिन्द्र|	upon the great trikadruka days hero rejoicing thee o indra drink the soma.
परदोधुवच्छ्मश्रुषु परीणानो याहि हरिभ्यां सुतस्यपीतिम|	come with bay steeds to drink of libation shaking the drops from out thy beard contented.
धिष्वा शवः शूर येन वर्त्रमवाभिनद दानुमौर्णवाभम|	hero assume the might wherewith thou clavest vṛtra piecemeal the dānava aurṇavābha.
अपाव्र्णोर्ज्योतिरार्याय नि सव्यतः सादि दस्युरिन्द्र|	thou hast disclosed the light to light the Ārya on thy left hand o indra sank the dasyu.
सनेम ये त ऊतिभिस्तरन्तो विश्वा सप्र्ध आर्येण दस्यून|	may we gain wealth subduing with thy succour and with the Ārya all our foes the dasyus.
अस्मभ्यं तत तवाष्ट्रं विश्वरूपमरन्धयः साख्यस्य तरिताय|	our gain was that to tṛta of our party thou gavest up tvaṣṭars son viśvarūpa.
अस्य सुवानस्य मन्दिनस्त्रितस्य नयर्बुदं वाव्र्धानो अस्तः|	he cast down arbuda what time his vigour was strengthened by libations poured by tṛta.
अवर्तयत सूर्यो न चक्रं भिनद वलमिन्द्रो अङगिरस्वान|	indra sent forth his whirling wheel like sūrya and aided by the aṅgirases rent vala.
नूनं सा ते परति वरं जरित्रे दुहीयदिन्द्र दक्षिणा मघोनी|	now let that wealthy cow of thine o indra yield in return a boon to him who lauds thee.
शिक्षा सतोत्र्भ्यो माति धग भगो नो बर्हद वदेम व स|	give to thy praisers let not fortune fail us loud may we speak with brave men in the assembly.
उदु षय देवः सविता सवाय शश्वत्तमं तदपा वह्निरस्थात|	uprisen is savitar this god to quicken priest who neglects not this most constant duty.
नूनं देवेभ्यो वि हि धाति रत्नमथाभजद वीतिहोत्रं सवस्तौ|	to the gods verily he gives rich treasure and blesses him who calls them to the banquet.
विश्वस्य हि शरुष्टये देव ऊर्ध्वः पर बाहवा पर्थुपाणिः सिसर्ति|	having gone up on high the god broadhanded spreads his arms widely forth that all may mark him.
आपश्चिदस्य वरत आ निम्र्ग्रा अयं चिद वातो रमते परिज्मन|	even the waters bend them to his service even this wind rests in the circling region.
आशुभिश्चिद यान वि मुचाति नूनमरीरमदतमानं चिदेतोः|	though borne by swift steeds he will yet unyoke them e’en the fleet chariot hath he stayed from going.
अह्यर्षूणां चिन नययानविष्यामनु वरतं सवितुर्मोक्यागात|	he hath checked e’en their haste who glide like serpents night closely followed savitars dominion.
पुनः समव्यद विततं वयन्ती मध्या कर्तोर्न्यधाच्छक्म धीरः|	what was spread out she weaves afresh reweaving the skilful leaves his labour halfcompleted.
उत संहायास्थाद वय रतूं अदर्धररमतिःसविता देव आगात|	he hath arisen from rest and parted seasons savitar hath approached god holyminded.
नानौकांसि दुर्यो विश्वमायुर्वि तिष्ठते परभवः शोको अग्नेः|	through various dwellings through entire existence spreads manifest the household light of agni.
जयेष्ठं माता सूनवे भागमाधादन्वस्यकेतमिषितं सवित्रा|	the mother gives her son the goodliest portion and savitar hath sped to meet his summons.
समाववर्ति विष्ठितो जिगीषुर्विश्वेषां कामश्चरताममाभूत|	he comes again unfolded fain for conquest at home was he the love of all things moving.
शश्वानपो विक्र्तं हित्व्यागादनु वरतं सवितुर्दैव्यस्य|	each man hath come leaving his evil doings after the godlike savitars commandment.
तवया हितमप्यमप्सु भागं धन्वान्वा मर्गयसो वि तस्थुः|	the wild beasts spread through desert places seeking their watery share which thou hast set in waters.
वनानि विभ्यो नकिरस्य तानि वरता देवस्य सवितुर्मिनन्ति|	the woods are given to the birds these statutes of the god savitar none disobeyeth.
याद्राध्यं वरुणो योनिमप्यमनिशितं निमिषि जर्भुराणः|	with utmost speed in restless haste at sunset varuṇa seeks his watery habitation.
विश्वो मार्ताण्डो वरजमा पशुर्गात सथशो जन्मानि सविता वयाकः|	then seeks each bird his nest each beast his lodging in due place savitar hath set each creature.
न यस्येन्द्रो वरुणो न मित्रो वरतमर्यमा न मिनन्ति रुद्रः|	him whose high law not varuṇa nor indra not mitra aryaman nor rudra breaketh.
नारातयस्तमिदं सवस्ति हुवे देवं सवितारं नमोभिः|	nor evilhearted fiends here for my welfare him i invoke god savitar with worship.
भगं धियं वाजयन्तः पुरन्धिं नराशंसो गनास्पतिर्नो अव्याः|	may they who strengthen bliss and thought and wisdom and the dames’ lord and narāśaṁsa aid us.
आये वामस्य संगथे रयीणां परिया देवस्य सवितुः सयाम|	that good may come to us and wealth be gathered may we be savitar the gods beloved.
अस्मभ्यं तद दिवो अद्भ्यः पर्थिव्यास्त्वया दत्तं काम्यं राध आ गात|	so come to us our hearts desire the bounty bestowed by thee from heaven and earth and waters.
शं यत सतोत्र्भ्य आपये भवात्युरुशंसाय सवितर्जरित्रे|	that it be well with friends and those who praise thee and savitar with the loudlauding singer.
हुवे वः सुद्योत्मानं सुव्र्क्तिं विशामग्निमतिथिं सुप्रयसम|	for you i call the glorious refulgent agni the guest of men rich in oblations.
मित्र इव यो दिधिषाय्यो भूद देव आदेवे जने जातवेदाः|	whom all must strive to win even as a lover god among godly people jātavedas.
इमं विधन्तो अपां सधस्थे दवितादधुर्भ्र्गवो विक्ष्वायोः|	bhṛgus who served him in the home of waters set him of old in houses of the living.
एष विश्वान्यभ्यस्तु भूमा देवानामग्निररतिर्जीराश्वः|	over all worlds let agni be the sovran the messenger of gods with rapid coursers.
अग्निं देवासो मानुषीषु विक्षु परियं धुः कषेष्यन्तो नमित्रम|	among the tribes of men the gods placed agni as a dear friend when they would dwell among them.
स दीदयदुशतीरूर्म्या आ दक्षाय्यो यो दास्वते दम आ|	against the longing nights may he shine brightly and show the offerer in the house his vigour.
अस्य रण्वा सवस्येव पुष्टिः सन्द्र्ष्टिरस्य हियानस्य दक्षोः|	sweet is his growth as of ones own possessions his look when rushing fain to burn is lovely.
वि यो भरिभ्रदोषधीषु जिह्वामत्यो न रथ्यो दोधवीति वारान|	he darts his tongue forth like a harnessed courser who shakes his flowing tail among the bushes.
आ यन मे अभ्वं वनदः पनन्तोशिग्भ्यो नामिमीत वर्णम|	since they who honour me have praised my greatnesshe gave as twere his hue to those who love him.
स चित्रेण चिकिते रंसु भासा जुजुर्वान यो मुहुरा युवा भूत|	known is he by his bright delightful splendour and waxing old renews his youth for ever.
आ यो वना तात्र्षाणो न भाति वार्ण पथा रथ्येवस्वानीत|	like one athirst he lighteth up the forests like water down the chariot ways he roareth.
कर्ष्णाध्वा तपू रण्वश्चिकेत दयौरिव समयमानो नभोभिः|	on his black path he shines in burning beauty marked as it were the heaven that smiles through vapour.
स यो वयस्थादभि दक्षदुर्वीं पशुर्नैति सवयुरगोपाः|	around consuming the broad earth he wanders free roaming like an ox without a herdsman.
अग्निः शोचिष्मानतसान्युष्णन कर्ष्णव्यथिरस्वदयन न भूम|	agni refulgent burning up the bushes with blackened lines as though the earth he seasoned.
नू ते पूर्वस्यावसो अधीतौ तर्तीये विदथे मन्म शंसि|	i in remembrance of thine ancient favour have sung my hymn in this our third assembly.
अस्मे अग्ने संयद्वीरं बर्हन्तं कषुमन्तं वाजं सवपत्यंरयिं दाः|	o agni give us wealth with store of heroes and mighty strength in food and noble offspring.
तवया यथा गर्त्समदासो अग्ने गुहा वन्वन्त उपरानभि षयुः|	may the gṛtsamadas serving in secret through thee o agni overcome their neighbours.
सुवीरासो अभिमातिषाहः समत सूरिभ्यो गर्णते तद वयो धाः|	rich in good heroes and subduing foemen that vital power give thou to chiefs and singers.
अस्माकं मित्रावरुणावतं रथमादित्यै रुद्रैर्वसुभिः सचाभुवा|	help varuṇa and mitra o ye twain allied with vasus rudras and Ādityas help our car.
पर यद वयो न पप्तन वस्मनस परि शरवस्यवोह्र्षीवन्तो वनर्षदः|	that as the wild birds of the forest from their home our horses may fly forth glad eager for renown.
अध समा न उदवता सजोषसो रथं देवासो अभि विक्षु वाजयुम|	yea now ye gods of one accord speed on our car what time among the folk it seeks an act of might.
यदाशवः पद्याभिस्तित्रतो रजः पर्थिव्याः सानौ जङघनन्त पाणिभिः|	when hasting through the region with the stamp of hoofs our swift steeds trample on the ridges of the earth.
उत सय न इन्द्रो विश्वचर्षणिर्दिवः शर्धेन मारुतेन सुक्रतुः|	or may our indra here the friend of all mankind coming from heaven most wise girt by the marut host.
अनु नु सथात्यव्र्काभिरूतिभी रथं महे सनये वाजसातये|	accompany with aid untroubled by a foe our car to mighty gain to win the meed of strength.
उत सय देवो भुवनस्य सक्षणिस्त्वष्टा गनाभिः सजोषा जूजुवद रथम|	or may this tvaṣṭar god who rules the world with power oneminded with the goddesses speed forth our car.
इळा भगो बर्हद्दिवोत रोदसी पूषा पुरन्धिरश्विनावधा पती|	iḷā and bhaga the celestial earth and heaven pūṣan purandhi and the aśvins ruling lords.
उत तये देवी सुभगे मिथूद्र्शोषासानक्ता जगतामपीजुवा|	or seen alternate those two blessed goddesses morning and night who stir all living things to act.
सतुषे यद वां पर्थिवि नव्यसा वच सथातुश्च वयस्त्रिवया उपस्तिरे|	while with my newest song i praise you both o earth that from what moves not ye may spread forth threefold food.
उत वः शंसमुशिजामिव शमस्यहिर्बुध्न्योअज एकपादुत|	your blessing as a boon for suppliants we desire the dragon of the deep and ajaekapād.
तरित रभुक्षाः सविता चनो दधेअपां नपादाशुहेमा धिया शमि|	trita Ṛbhukṣan savitar shall joy in us and the floods swift child in our worship and our prayer.
एता वो वश्म्युद्यता यजत्रा अतक्षन्नायवो नव्यसे सम|	these earnest prayers i pray to you ye holy to pay you honour living men have formed them.
शरवस्यवो वाजं चकानाः सप्तिर्न रथ्यो अह धीतिमश्याः|	men fain to win the prize and glory may they win as a carhorse might the goal your notice.
जोहूत्रो अग्निः परथमः पितेवेळस पदे मनुषा यत समिद्धः|	agni first loudly calling like a father kindled by man upon the seat of worship.
शरियं वसानो अम्र्तो विचेता मर्म्र्जेन्यः शरवस्यःस वाजी|	clothed in his glory deathless keen of insight must be adorned by all the strong the famous.
शरूया अग्निश्चित्रभानुर्हवं मे विश्वाभिर्गीर्भिरम्र्तो विचेताः|	may agni the resplendent hear my calling through all my songs immortal keen of insight.
शयावा रथं वहतो रोहिता वोतारुषाह चक्रे विभ्र्त्रः|	dark steeds or ruddy draw his car or carried in sundry ways he makes them red of colour.
उत्तानायामजनयन सुषूतं भुवदग्निः पुरुपेशासु गर्भः|	on wood supine they got the wellformed infant a germ in variousfashioned plants was agni.
शिरिणायां चिदक्तुना महोभिरपरीव्र्तो वसति परचेताः|	and in the night not compassed round by darkness he dwells exceeding wise with rays of splendour.
जिघर्म्यग्निं हविषा घर्तेन परतिक्षियन्तं भुवनानि विश्वा|	with oil and sacred gifts i sprinkle agni who makes his home in front of all things living.
पर्थुं तिरश्चा वयसा बर्हन्तं वयचिष्ठमन्नै रभसं दर्शानम|	broad vast through vital power oer all expanded conspicuous strong with all the food that feeds him.
आ विश्वतः परत्यञ्चं जिघर्म्यरक्षसा मनसा तज्जुषेत|	i pour to him who looks in all directions may he accept it with a friendly spirit.
मर्यश्रीः सप्र्हयद्वर्णो अग्निर्नाभिम्र्शे तन्वा जर्भुराणः|	agni with bridegrooms grace and lovely colour may not be touched when all his form is fury.
जञेया भागं सहसानो वरेण तवादूतासो मनुवद वदेम|	by choice victorious recognize thy portion with thee for envoy may we speak like manu.
अनूनमग्निं जुह्वा वचस्या मधुप्र्चं धनसाजोहवीमि|	obtaining wealth i call on perfect agni who with an eloquent tongue dispenses sweetness.
परत्यु अदर्श्यायत्युछन्ती दुहिता दिवः|	advancing sending forth her rays the daughter of the sky is seen.
अपो महि वययति चक्षसे तमो जयोतिष कर्णोति सूनरी|	uncovering that we may see the mighty gloom the friendly lady makes the light.
उदुस्रियाः सर्जते सूर्यः सचानुद्यन नक्षत्रमर्चिवत|	the sun ascending the refulgent star pours down his beams together with the dawn.
तवेदुषो वयुषि सूर्यस्य च सं भक्तेन गमेमहि|	o dawn at thine arising and the suns may we attain the share allotted us.
परति तवा दुहितर्दिव उषो जीरा अभुत्स्महि|	promptly we woke to welcome thee o uṣas daughter of the sky.
या वहसि पुरुस्पार्हं वनन्वति रत्नं न दाशुषे मयः|	thee bounteous one who bringest all we long to have and to the offerer health and wealth.
उछन्ती या कर्णोषि मंहना महि परख्यै देवि सवर्द्र्शे|	thou dawning workest fain to light the great world yea heaven goddess that it may be seen.
तस्यास्ते रत्नभाज ईमहे वयं सयाम मातुर्न सूनवः|	we yearn to be thine own dealer of wealth may we be to this mother like her sons.
तच्चित्रं राध आ भरोषो यद दीर्घश्रुत्तमम|	bring us that wondrous bounty dawn that shall be famed most far away.
यत तेदिवो दुहितर्मर्तभोजनं तद रास्व भुनजामहै|	what child of heaven thou hast of nourishment for man bestow thou on us to enjoy.
शरवः सूरिभ्यो अम्र्तं वसुत्वनं वाजानस्मभ्यं गोमतः|	give to our princes opulence and immortal fame and strength in herds of kine to us.
चोदयित्री मघोनः सून्र्तावत्युषा उछदप सरिधः|	may she who prompts the wealthy lady of sweet strains may uṣas dawn our foes away.
आ वो वाहिष्ठो वहतु सतवध्यै रथो वाजा रभुक्षणो अम्र्क्तः|	let your bestbearing car that must be lauded neer injured bring you vājas and Ṛbhukṣans.
अभि तरिप्र्ष्ठैः सवनेषु सोमैर्मदे सुशिप्रा महभिः पर्णध्वम|	fill you fairhelmeted with mighty soma thricemixed at our libations to delight you.
यूयं ह रत्नं मघवत्सु धत्थ सवर्द्र्श रभुक्षणो अम्र्क्तम|	ye who behold the light of heaven Ṛbhukṣans give our rich patrons unmolested riches.
सं यज्ञेषु सवधावन्तः पिबध्वं वि नो राधांसि मतिभिर्दयध्वम|	drink heavenlynatured at our sacrifices and give us bounties for the hymns we sing you.
उवोचिथ हि मघवन देष्णं महो अर्भस्य वसुनो विभागे|	for thou o bounteous one art used to giving at parting treasure whether small or ample.
उभा ते पूर्णा वसुना गभस्ती न सून्र्ता नि यमते वसव्या|	filled full are both thine arms with great possessions thy goodness keeps thee not from granting riches.
तवमिन्द्र सवयशा रभुक्षा वाजो न साधुरस्तमेष्य रक्वा|	indra highfamed as vāja and Ṛbhukṣans thou goest working singing to the dwelling.
वयं नु ते दाश्वांसः सयाम बरह्म कर्ण्वन्तो हरिवो वसिष्ठाः|	lord of bay steeds this day may we vasisthas offer our prayers to thee and bring oblations.
सनितासि परवतो दाशुषे चिद याभिर्विवेषो हर्यश्व धीभिः|	thou winnest swift advancement for thy servant through hymns lord of bay steeds which thou hast favoured.
ववन्मा नु ते युज्याभिरूती कदा न इन्द्र राय आ दशस्येः|	for thee with friendly succour have we battled and when o indra wilt thou grant us riches.
वासयसीव वेधसस्त्वं नः कदा न इन्द्र वचसो बुबोधः|	to us thy priests a home as twere thou givest when indra wilt thou recognize our praises.
अस्तं तात्या धिया रयिं सुवीरं पर्क्षो नो अर्वा नयुहीत वाजी|	may thy strong steed through our ancestral worship bring food and wealth with heroes to our dwelling.
अभि यं देवी निरतिश्चिदीशे नक्षन्त इन्द्रं शरदःसुप्र्क्षः|	though nirrti the goddess reigneth round him autumns with food in plenty come to indra.
उप तरिबन्धुर्जरदष्टिमेत्यस्ववेशं यं कर्णवन्त मर्ताः|	with three close friends to length of days he cometh he whom men let not rest at home in quiet.
आ नो राधांसि सवितः सतवध्या आ रायो यन्तु पर्वतस्यरातौ|	promise us gifts o savitar may riches come unto us in parvatas full bounty.
सदा नो दिव्यः पायुः सिषक्तु यूयं पात|	may the celestial guardian still attend us preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
अग्निं वो देवमग्निभिः सजोषा यजिष्ठं दूतमध्वरेक्र्णुध्वम|	associate with fires make your god agni envoy at sacrifice best skilled in worship.
यो मर्त्येषु निध्रुविरतावा तपुर्मूर्धा घर्तान्नः पावकः|	established firm among mankind the holy flamecrowned and fed with oil the purifier.
परोथदश्वो न यवसेअविष्यन यदा महः संवरणाद वयस्थात|	like a steed neighing eager for the pasture when he hath stepped forth from the great enclosure.
आदस्य वातो अनु वाति शोचिरध सम ते वरजनं कर्ष्णमस्ति|	then the wind following blows upon his splendour and straight the path is black which thou hast travelled.
उद यस्य ते नवजातस्य वर्ष्णोअग्ने चरन्त्यजरा इधानाः|	from thee a bull but newly born o agni the kindled everlasting flames rise upward.
अछा दयामरुषो धूम एति सं दूतो अग्न ईयसे हि देवान|	aloft to heaven thy ruddy smoke ascendeth agni thou speedest to the gods as envoy.
वि यस्य ते पर्थिव्यां पाजो अश्रेत तर्षु यदन्ना समव्र्क्तजम्भैः|	thou whose fresh lustre oer the earth advanceth when greedily with thy jaws thy food thou eatest.
सेनेव सर्ष्टा परसितिष ट एति यवं न दस्म जुह्वा विवेक्षि|	like a host hurried onward comes thy lasso fierce with thy tongue thou piercest as twere barley.
तमिद दोषा तमुषसि यविष्ठमग्निमत्यं न मर्जयन्त नरः|	the men have decked him both at eve and morning most youthful agni as they tend a courser.
निशिशाना अतिथिमस्य योनौ दीदाय शोचिराहुतस्य वर्ष्णः|	they kindle him a guest within his dwelling bright shines the splendour of the worshipped hero.
सुसन्द्र्क ते सवनीक परतीकं वि यद रुक्मो न रोचस उपाके|	o fair of face beautiful is thine aspect when very near at hand like gold thou gleamest.
दिवो न ते तन्यतुरेति शुष्मश्चित्रो न सूरः परति चक्षि भानुम|	like heavens thundering roar thy might approaches and like the wondrous sun thy light thou showest.
यथा वः सवाहाग्नये दाशेम परीळाभिर्घ्र्तवद्भिश्च हव्यैः|	that we may worship with your hail to agni with sacrificial cakes and fat oblations.
तेभिर्नो अग्ने अमितैर्महोभिः शतं पूर्भिरायसीभिर्नि पाहि|	guard us o agni with those boundless glories as with a hundred fortresses of iron.
या वा ते सन्ति दाशुषे अध्र्ष्टा गिरो वा याभिर्न्र्वतीरुरुष्याः|	thine are resistless songs for him who offers and herogiving hymns wherewith thou savest.
ताभिर्नः सूनो सहसो नि पाहि समत सूरीञ जरितॄञ जातवेदः|	with these o son of strength o jātavedas guard us preserve these princes and the singers.
निर्यत पूतेव सवधितिः शुचिर्गात सवया कर्पा तन्वा रोचमानः|	when forth he cometh like an axe newsharpened pure in his form resplendent in his body.
आ यो मात्रोरुशेन्यो जनिष्ट देवयज्याय सुक्रतुः पावकः|	sprung sought with eager longing from his parents for the gods worship sage and purifier.
एता नो अग्ने सौभगा दिदीह्यपि करतुं सुचेतसं वतेम|	shine this felicity on us o agni may we attain to perfect understanding.
विश्वा सतोत्र्भ्यो गर्णते च सन्तु यूयं पात|	all happiness be theirs who sing and praise thee ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
पर साकमुक्षे अर्चता गणाय यो दैव्यस्य धाम्नस्तुविष्मान|	sing to the troop that pours down rain in common the mighty company of celestial nature.
उत कषोदन्ति रोदसी महित्वा नक्षन्ते नाकं निरतेरवंशात|	they make the worldhalves tremble with their greatness from depths of earth and sky they reach to heaven.
जनूश्चिद वो मरुतस्त्वेष्येण भीमासस्तुविमन्यवोअयासः|	yea your birth maruts was with wild commotion ye who move swiftly fierce in wrath terrific.
पर ये महोभिरोजसोत सन्ति विश्वो वो यामन भयते सवर्द्र्क|	ye allsurpassing in your might and vigour each looker on the light fears at your coming.
बर्हद वयो मघवद्भ्यो दधात जुजोषन्निन मरुतः सुष्टुतिं नः|	give ample vital power unto our princes let our fair praises gratify the maruts.
गतो नाध्वा वि तिराति जन्तुं पर ण सपार्हाभिरूतिभिस्तिरेत|	as the way travelled helpeth people onward so further us with your delightful succours.
युष्मोतो विप्रो मरुतः शतस्वी युष्मोतो अर्वा सहुरिः सहस्री|	your favoured singer counts his wealth by hundreds the strong steed whom ye favour wins a thousand.
युष्मोतः सम्राळ उत हन्ति वर्त्रं पर तद वो अस्तु धूतयो देष्णम|	the sovran whom ye aid destroys the foeman may this your gift ye shakers be distinguished.
ताना रुद्रस्य मीळ्हुषो विवासे कुविन नंसन्ते मरुतः पुनर्नः|	i call as such the sons of bounteous rudra will not the maruts turn again to usward.
यत सस्वर्ता जिहीळिरे यदाविरव तदेन ईमहे तुराणाम|	what secret sin or open stirs their anger that we implore the swift ones to forgive us.
परा सा वाचि सुष्टुतिर्मघोनामिदं सूक्तं मरुतो जुषन्त|	this eulogy of the bounteous hath been spoken accept ye maruts this our hymn of praises.
आराच्चिद दवेषो वर्षणो युयोत यूयं पात|	ye bulls keep those who hate us at a distance preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
आ विश्ववाराश्विना गतं नः पर तत सथानमवाचि वां पर्थिव्याम|	rich in all blessings aśvins come ye hither this place on earth is called your own possession.
अश्वो न वाजी शुनप्र्ष्ठो अस्थादा यत सेदथुर्ध्रुवसे न योनिम|	like a strong horse with a fair back it standeth whereon as in a lap ye seat you firmly.
सिषक्ति सा वां सुमतिश्चनिष्ठातापि घर्मो मनुषो दुरोणे|	this most delightful eulogy awaits you in the mans house drinkoffering hath been heated.
यो वां समुद्रान सरितः पिपर्त्येतग्वा चिन न सुयुजा युजानः|	which bringeth you over the seas and rivers yoking astwere two wellmatched shining horses.
यानि सथानान्यश्विना दधाथे दिवो यह्वीष्वोषधीषु विक्षु|	whatever dwellings ye possess o aśvins in fields of men or in the streams of heaven.
नि पर्वतस्य मूर्धनि सदन्तेषं जनाय दाशुषेवहन्ता|	resting upon the summit of the mountain or bringing food to him who gives oblation.
चनिष्टं देवा ओषधीष्वप्सु यद योग्या अश्नवैथे रषीणाम|	delight yourselves ye gods in plants and waters when Ṛṣis give them and ye find they suit you.
पुरूणि रत्ना दधतौ नयस्मे अनु पूर्वाणि चख्यथुर्युगानि|	enriching us with treasures in abundance ye have looked back to former generations.
शुश्रुवांसा चिदश्विना पुरूण्यभि बरह्माणि चक्षाथे रषीणाम|	aśvins though ye have heard them oft aforetime regard the many prayers which Ṛṣis offer.
परति पर यातं वरमा जनायास्मे वामस्तु सुमतिश्चनिष्ठा|	come to the man even as his heart desireth may we enjoy your most delightful favour.
यो वां यज्ञो नासत्या हविष्मान कर्तब्रह्मा समर्यो भवाति|	come to the sacrifice offered you nāsatyas with men oblations and prayer duly uttered.
उप पर यातं वरमा वसिष्ठमिमा बरह्माण्य रच्यन्ते युवभ्याम|	come to vasiṣṭha as his heart desireth for unto you these holy hymns are chanted.
इयं मनीषा इयमश्विना गीरिमां सुव्र्क्तिं वर्षणा जुषेथाम|	this is the thought this is the song o aśvins accept this hymn of ours ye steers with favour.
इमा बरह्माणि युवयून्यग्मन यूयं पात|	may these our prayers addressed to you come nigh you preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
वयुषा आवो दिविजा रतेनाविष्क्र्ण्वाना महिमानमागात|	born in the heavens the dawn hath flushed and showing her majesty is come as law ordaineth.
अप दरुहस्तम आवरजुष्टमङगिरस्तमा पथ्या अजीगः|	she hath uncovered fiends and hateful darkness best of aṅgirases hath waked the pathways.
महे नो अद्य सुविताय बोध्युषो महे सौभगाय पर यन्धि|	rouse us this day to high and happy fortune to great felicity o dawn promote us.
चित्रं रयिं यशसं धेह्यस्मे देवि मर्तेषु मानुषि शरवस्युम|	vouchsafe us manifold and splendid riches famed among mortals manbefriending goddess.
एते तये भानवो दर्शतायाश्चित्रा उषसो अम्र्तास आगुः|	see lovely mornings everlasting splendours bright with their varied colours have approached us.
जनयन्तो दैव्यानि वरतान्याप्र्णन्तो अन्तरिक्षा वयस्थुः|	filling the region of midair producing the rites of holy worship they have mounted.
एषा सया युजाना पराकात पञ्च कषितीः परि सद्यो जिगाति|	she yokes her chariot far away and swiftly visits the lands where the five tribes are settled.
अभिपश्यन्ती वयुना जनानां दिवो दुहिता भुवनस्यपत्नी|	looking upon the works and ways of mortals daughter of heaven the worlds imperial lady.
वाजिनीवती सूर्यस्य योषा चित्रामघा राय ईशे वसूनाम|	she who is rich in spoil the spouse of sūrya wondrously opulent rules all wealth and treasures.
रषिष्टुता जरयन्ती मघोन्युषा उछति वह्निभिर्ग्र्णाना|	consumer of our youth the seers extol her lauded by priests rich dawn shines out refulgent.
परति दयुतानामरुषासो अश्वाश्चित्रा अद्र्श्रन्नुषसं वहन्तः|	apparent are the steeds of varied colour the red steeds carrying resplendent morning.
याति शुभ्रा विश्वपिशा रथेन दधाति रत्नंविधते जनाय|	on her alllovely car she comes the fair one and brings rich treasure for her faithful servant.
सत्या सत्येभिर्महती महद्भिर्देवी देवेभिर्यजता यजत्रैः|	true with the true and mighty with the mighty with gods a goddess holy with the holy.
रुजद दर्ळ्हानि दददुस्रियाणां परति गाव उषसं वावशन्त|	she brake strong fences down and gave the cattle the kine were lowing as they greeted morning.
नू नो गोमद वीरवद धेहि रत्नमुषो अश्वावद पुरुभोजो अस्मे|	o dawn now give us wealth in kine and heroes and horses fraught with manifold enjoyment.
मा नो बर्हिः पुरुषता निदे कर्यूयं पात|	protect our sacred grass from mans reproaches preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
अमीवहा वास्तोष पते विश्वा रूपाण्याविशन|	vastospati who killest all disease and wearest every form.
सखा सुशेव एधि नः|	be an auspicious friend to us.
यदर्जुन सारमेय दतः पिशङग यछसे|	when o bright son of saramā thou showest tawnyhued thy teeth.
वीव भराजन्त रष्टय उप सरक्वेषु बप्सतो नि षु सवप|	they gleam like lances points within thy mouth when thou wouldst bite go thou to steep.
सतेनं राय सारमेय तस्करं वा पुनःसर|	saramās son retrace thy way bark at the robber and the thief.
सतोतॄनिन्द्रस्य रायसि किमस्मान दुछुनायसे नि षु सवप|	at indras singers barkest thou why dust thou seek to terrify us go to sleep.
तवं सूकरस्य दर्द्र्हि तव दर्दर्तु सूकरः|	be on thy guard against the boar and let the boar beware of thee.
सतोतॄनिन्द्रस्य|	at indras singers barkest thou why dost thou seek to terrify us go to sleep.
सस्तु माता सस्तु पिता सस्तु शवा सस्तु विश्पतिः|	sleep mother let the father sleep sleep dog and master of the house.
ससन्तु सर्वे जञातयः सस्त्वयमभितो जनः|	let all the kinsmen sleep sleep all the people who are round about.
य आस्ते यश्च चरति यश्च पश्यति नो जनः|	the man who sits the man who walks and whosoever looks on us.
तेषांसं हन्मो अक्षाणि यथेदं हर्म्यं तथा|	of these we closely shut the eyes even as we closely shut this house.
सहस्रश्र्ङगो वर्षभो यः समुद्रादुदाचरत|	the bull who hath a thousand horns who rises up from out the sea.
तेना सहस्येना वयं नि जनान सवापयामसि|	by him the strong and mighty one we lull and make the people sleep.
परोष्ठशया वह्येशया नारीर्यास्तल्पशीवरीः|	the women sleeping in the court lying without or stretched on beds.
सत्रियो याः पुण्यगन्धास्ताः सर्वाः सवापयामसि|	the matrons with their odorous sweetsthese one and all we lull to sleep.
पर दयावा यज्ञैः पर्थिवी नमोभिः सबाध ईळे बर्हतीयजत्रे|	as priest with solemn rites and adorations i worship heaven and earth the high and holy.
ते चिद धि पूर्वे कवयो गर्णन्तः पुरो मही दधिरे देवपुत्रे|	to them great parents of the gods have sages of ancient time singing assigned precedence.
पर पूर्वजे पितरा नव्यसीभिर्गीर्भिः कर्णुध्वं सदने रतस्य|	with newest hymns set in the seat of order those the two parents born before all others.
आ नो दयावाप्र्थिवी दैव्येन जनेन यातं महि वां वरूथम|	come heaven and earth with the celestial people hither to us for strong is your protection.
उतो हि वां रत्नधेयानि सन्ति पुरूणि दयावाप्र्थिवी सुदासे|	yea heaven and earth ye hold in your possession full many a treasure for the liberal giver.
अस्मे धत्तं यदसदस्क्र्धोयु यूयं पात|	grant us that wealth which comes in free abundance preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
समिधा जातवेदसे देवाय देवहूतिभिः|	with reverence and with offered gifts serve we the god whose flame is bright.
हविर्भिः शुक्रशोचिषे नमस्विनो वयं दाशेमाग्नये|	let us bring jātavedas fuel and adore agni when we invoke the gods.
वयं ते अग्ने समिधा विधेम वयं दाशेम सुष्टुती यजत्र|	agni may we perform thy rites with fuel and honour thee o holy one with praises.
वयं घर्तेनाध्वरस्य होतर्वयं देव हविषा भद्रशोचे|	honour thee priest of sacrifice with butter thee god of blessed light with our oblation.
आ नो देवेभिरुप देवहूतिमग्ने याहि वषट्क्र्तिं जुषाणः|	come agni with the gods to our invoking come pleased to offerings sanctified with vaṣaṭ.
तुभ्यं देवाय दाशतः सयाम यूयं पात|	may we be his who pays thee god due honour ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
संवत्सरं शशयाना बराह्मणा वरतचारिणः|	they who lay quiet for a year the brahmans who fulfil their vows.
वाचं पर्जन्यजिन्वितां पर मण्डूका अवादिषुः|	the frogs have lifted up their voice the voice parjanya hath inspired.
दिव्या आपो अभि यदेनमायन दर्तिं न शुष्कं सरसी शयानम|	what time on these as on a dry skin lying in the pools bed the floods of heaven descended.
गवामह न मायुर्वत्सिनीनां मण्दूकानां वग्नुरत्रा समेति|	the music of the frogs comes forth in concert like the cows lowing with their calves beside them.
यदीमेनानुशतो अभ्यवर्षीत तर्ष्यावतः पराव्र्ष्यागतायाम|	when at the coming of the rains the water has poured upon them as they yearned and thirsted.
अख्खलीक्र्त्या पितरं न पुत्रो अन्यो अन्यमुप वदन्तमेति|	one seeks another as he talks and greets him with cries of pleasure as a son his father.
अन्यो अन्यमनु गर्भ्णात्येनोरपां परसर्गे यदमन्दिषाताम|	each of these twain receives the other kindly while they are revelling in the flow of waters.
मण्डूको यदभिव्र्ष्टः कनिष्कन पर्ष्निः सम्प्र्ङकते हरितेन वाचम|	when the frog moistened by the rain springs forward and green and spotty both combine their voices.
यदेषामन्यो अन्यस्य वाचं शाक्तस्येव वदति शिक्षमाणः|	when one of these repeats the others language as he who learns the lesson of the teacher.
सर्वं तदेषां सम्र्धेव पर्व यत सुवाचो वदथनाध्यप्सु|	your every limb seems to be growing larger as ye converse with eloquence on the waters.
गोमायुरेको अजमायुरेकः पर्श्निरेको हरित एक एषाम|	onc is cowbellow and goatbleat the other one frog is green and one of them is spotty.
समानं नाम बिभ्रतो विरूपाः पुरुत्रा वाचं पिपिशुर्वदन्तः|	they bear one common name and yet they vary and talking modulate the voice diversely.
बराह्मणासो अतिरात्रे न सोमे सरो न पूर्णमभितो वदन्तः|	as brahmans sitting round the brimful vessel talk at the somarite of atiratra.
संवत्सरस्य तदहः परि षठ यन मण्डूकाः पराव्र्षीणं बभूव|	so frogs ye gather round the pool to honour this day of all the year the first of raintime.
बराह्मणासः सोमिनो वाचमक्रत बरह्म कर्ण्वन्तः परिवत्सरीणम|	these brahmans with the soma juice performing their yearlong rite have lifted up their voices.
अध्वर्यवो घर्मिणः सिष्विदाना आविर्भवन्ति गुह्या न के चित|	and these adhvaryus sweating with their kettles come forth and show themselves and none are hidden.
देवहितिं जुगुपुर्द्वादशस्य रतुं नरो न पर मिनन्त्येते|	they keep the twelve months godappointed order and never do the men neglect the season.
संवत्सरे पराव्र्ष्यागतायां तप्ता घर्मा अश्नुवते विसर्गम|	soon as the raintime in the year returneth these who were heated kettles gain their freedom.
गोमायुरदादजमायुरदात पर्श्निरदाद धरितो नो वसूनि|	cowbellow and goatbleat have granted riches and green and spotty have vouchsafed us treasure.
गवां मण्डूका ददतः शतानि सहस्रसावे पर तिरन्त आयुः|	the frogs who give us cows in hundreds lengthen our lives in this most fertilizing season.
पर सम्राजो असुरस्य परशस्तिं पुंसः कर्ष्टीनामनुमाद्यस्य|	praise of the asura high imperial ruler the manly one in whom the folk shall triumph.
इन्द्रस्येव पर तवसस कर्तानि वन्दे दारुं वन्दमानोविवक्मि|	i laud his deeds who is as strong as indra and lauding celebrate the fortdestroyer.
कविं केतुं धासिं भानुमद्रेर्हिन्वन्ति शं राज्यं रोदस्योः|	sage sing food lightthey bring him from the mountain the blessed sovran of the earth and heaven.
पुरन्दरस्य गीर्भिरा विवासेअग्नेर्व्रतानि पूर्व्या महानि|	i decorate with songs the mighty actions which agni fortdestroyer did aforetime.
नयक्रतून गरथिनो मर्ध्रवाचः पणीन्रश्रद्धानव्र्धानयज्ञान|	the foolish faithless rudelyspeaking niggards without belief or sacrifice or worship.
परपर तान दस्यून्रग्निर्विवाय पूर्वश्चकारापरानयज्यून|	far far sway hath agni chased those dasytis and in the cast hath turned the godless westward.
यो अपाचीने तमसि मदन्तीः पराचीश्चकार नर्तमः शचीभिः|	him who brought eastward manliest with his prowess the maids rejoicing in the western darkness.
तमीशानं वस्वो अग्निं गर्णीषेअनानतं दमयन्तं पर्तन्यून|	that agni i extol the lord of riches unyielding tamer of assailing foemen.
यो देह्यो अनमयद वधस्नैर्यो अर्यपत्नीरुषसश्चकार|	him who brake down the walls with deadly weapons and gave the mornings to anoble husband.
स निरुध्या नहुषो यज्वो अग्निर्विशश्चक्रे बलिह्र्तः सहोभिः|	young agni who with conquering strength subduing the tribes of nahus made them bring their tribute.
यस्य शर्मन्नुप विश्वे जनास एवैस्तस्थुः सुमतिं भिक्षमाणाः|	in whose protection all men rest by nature desiring to enjoy his gracious favour.
वैश्वानरो वरमा रोदस्योराग्निः ससाद पित्रोरुपस्थम|	agni vaiśvānara in his parents bosom hath found the choicest seat in earth and heaven.
आ देवो ददे बुध्न्या वसूनि वैश्वानर उदिता सूर्यस्य|	vaiśvānara the god at the suns setting hath taken to himself deephidden treasures.
आ समुद्रादवरादा परस्मादाग्निर्ददे दिव आ पर्थिव्याः|	agni hath taken them from earth and heaven from the sea under and the sea above us.
नू मर्तो दयते सनिष्यन यो विष्णव उरुगायाय दाशत|	neer doth the man repent who seeking profit bringeth his gift to the farstriding viṣṇu.
पर यः सत्राचा मनसा यजात एतावन्तं नर्यम आविवासात|	he who adoreth him with all his spirit winneth himself so great a benefactor.
तवं विष्णो सुमतिं विश्वजन्याम अप्रयुताम एवयावो मतिं दाः|	thou viṣṇu constant in thy courses gavest goodwill to all men and a hymn that lasteth.
पर्चो यथा नः सुवितस्य भूरेर अश्वावतः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य रायः|	that thou mightst move us to abundant comfort of very splendid wealth with store of horses.
तरिर देवः पर्थिवीम एष एतां वि चक्रमे शतर्चसम महित्वा|	three times strode forth this god in all his grandeur over this earth bright with a hundred splendours.
पर विष्णुर अस्तु तवसस तवीयान तवेषं हय अस्य सथविरस्य नाम|	foremost be viṣṇu stronger than the strongest for glorious is his name who lives for ever.
वि चक्रमे पर्थिवीम एष एतां कषेत्राय विष्णुर मनुषे दशस्यन|	over this earth with mighty step strode viṣṇu ready to give it for a home to manu.
धरुवासो अस्य कीरयो जनास उरुक्षितिं सुजनिमा चकार|	in him the humble people trust for safety he nobly born hath made them spacious dwellings.
पर तत ते अद्य शिपिविष्ट नामार्यः शंसामि वयुनानि विद्वान|	today i laud this name o gipivista i skilled in rules the name of thee the noble.
तं तवा गर्णामि तवसम अतव्यान कषयन्तम अस्य रजसः पराके|	yea i the poor and weak praise thee the mighty who dwellest in the realm beyond this region.
किम इत ते विष्णो परिचक्ष्यम भूत पर यद ववक्षे शिपिविष्टो अस्मि|	what was there to be blamed in thee o viṣṇu when thou declaredst i am sipivista.
मा वर्पो अस्मद अप गूह एतद यद अन्यरूपः समिथे बभूथ|	hide not this form from us nor keep it secret since thou didst wear another shape in battle.
वषट ते विष्णव आस आ कर्णोमि तन मे जुषस्व शिपिविष्ट हव्यम|	o viṣṇu unto thee my lips cry vaṣaṭ let this mine offering sipivista please thee.
वर्धन्तु तवा सुष्टुतयो गिरो मे यूयम पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	may these my songs of eulogy exalt thee preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
दिवि कषयन्ता रजसः पर्थिव्यां पर वां घर्तस्य निर्णिजोददीरन|	ye twain who rule in heaven and earth the region clothed be your clouds in robes of oil and fatness.
हव्यं नो मित्रो अर्यमा सुजातो राजा सुक्षत्रो वरुणो जुषन्त|	may the imperial varuṇa and mitra and highborn aryaman accept our presents.
आ राजाना मह रतस्य गोपा सिन्धुपती कषत्रिया यातमर्वाक|	kings guards of rrtighty everlasting order come hitherward ye princes lords of rivers.
इळां नो मित्रावरुणोत वर्ष्टिमव दिव इन्वतं जीरदानू|	send us from heaven o varuṇa and mitra rain and sweet food ye who pour down your bounties.
मित्रस्तन नो वरुणो देवो अर्यः पर साधिष्ठेभिः पथिभिर्नयन्तु|	may the dear god and varuṇa and mitra conduct us by the most effective pathways.
बरवद यथा न आदरिः सुदास इषा मदेम सह देवगोपाः|	that foes may say unto sudās our chieftain may we too joy in food with gods to guard us.
यो वां गर्तं मनसा तक्षदेतमूर्ध्वां धीतिं कर्णवद धारयच्च|	him who hath wrought for you this car in spirit who makes the song rise upward and sustains it.
उक्षेथां मित्रावरुणा घर्तेन ता राजानासुक्षितीस्तर्पयेथाम|	bedew with fatness varuṇa nd mitra ye kings make glad the pleasant dwellingplaces.
एष सतोमो वरुण मित्र तुभ्यं सोमः शुक्रो न वायवेअयामि|	to you this laud o varuṇa and mitra is offered like bright soma juice to vāyu.
अविष्टं धियो जिग्र्तं पुरम्धीर्यूयं पात|	favour our songs of praise wake thought and spirit preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
आ वायो भूष शुचिपा उप नः सहस्रं ते नियुतो विश्ववार|	o vĀyu drinker of the pure be near us a thousand teams are thine allbounteous giver.
उपो ते अन्धो मद्यमयामि यस्य देव दधिषे पूर्वपेयम|	to thee the rapturebringing juice is offered whose first draught god thou takest as thy portion.
पर सोता जीरो अध्वरेष्वस्थात सोममिन्द्राय वायवे पिबध्यै|	prompt at the holy rites forth came the presser with somadraughts for indra and for vāyu.
पर यद वां मध्वो अग्रियं भरन्त्यध्वर्यवो देवयन्तः शचीभिः|	when ministering priests with strong devotion bring to you twain the first taste of the soma.
पर याभिर्यासि दाश्वांसमछा नियुद्भिर्वायविष्टयेदुरोणे|	the teams wherewith thou seekest him who offers within his home o viyu to direct him.
नि नो रयिं सुभोजसं युवस्व नि वीरं गव्यमश्व्यं च राधः|	therewith send wealth to us with full enjoyment a hero son and gifts of kine and horses.
ये वायव इन्द्रमादनास आदेवासो नितोशनासो अर्यः|	near to the gods and making indra joyful devout and offering precious gifts to vāyu.
घनन्तो वर्त्राणि सूरिभिः षयाम सासह्वांसो युधा नर्भिरमित्रान|	allied with princes smiting down the hostile may we with heroes conquer foes in battle.
आ नो नियुद्भिः शतिनीभिरध्वरं सहस्रिणीभिरुप याहि यज्ञम|	with thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands come to our sacrifice and solemn worship.
वायो अस्मिन सवने मादयस्व यूयं पात|	come vāyu make thee glad at this libation preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
वास्तोष पते परति जानीह्यस्मान सवावेशो अनमीवो भवा नः|	acknowledge us o guardian of the homestead bring no disease and give us happy entrance.
यत तवेमहे परति तन नो जुषस्व शं नो भव दविपदे शं चतुष्पदे|	whateer we ask of thee be pleased to grant it and prosper thou quadrupeds and bipeds.
वास्तोष पते परतरणो न एधि गयस्फानो गोभिरश्वेभिरिन्दो|	protector of the home be our promoter increase our wealth in kine and steeds o indu.
अजरासस्ते सख्ये सयाम पितेव पुत्रान परति नो जुषस्व|	may we be everyouthful in thy friendship be pleased in us as in his sons a father.
वास्तोष पते शग्मया संसदा ते सक्षीमहि रण्वया गातुमत्या|	through thy dear fellowship that bringeth welfare may we be victors guardian of the dwelling.
पाहि कषेम उत योगे वरं नो यूयं पात|	protect our happiness in rest and labour preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
अबोधि जार उषसामुपस्थाद धोता मन्द्रः कवितमः पावकः|	roused from their bosom is the dawns beloved the joyous priest most sapient purifier.
दधाति केतुमुभयस्य जन्तोर्हव्या देवेषु दरविणं सुक्र्त्सु|	he gives a signal both to gods and mortals to gods oblations riches to the pious.
स सुक्रतुर्यो वि दुरः पणीनां पुनानो अर्कं पुरुभोजसं नः|	most wise is he who forcing doors of paṇis brought the bright sun to us who feedeth many.
होता मन्द्रो विशां दमूनास्तिरस्तमो दद्र्शे राम्याणाम|	the cheerful priest mens friend and homecompanion through still nights darkness he is made apparent.
अमूरः कविरदितिर्विवस्वान सुसंसन मित्रो अतिथिः शिवोनः|	wise neer deceived uncircumscribed refulgent our gracious guest a friend with good attendants.
चित्रभानुरुषसां भात्यग्रेअपां गर्भः परस्वा विवेश|	shines forth with wondrous light before the mornings the young plants hath he entered child of waters.
ईळेन्यो वो मनुषो युगेषु समनगा अशुचज्जातवेदाः|	seeking our gatherings he your jātavedas hath shone adorable through human ages.
सुसन्द्र्शा भानुना यो विभाति परति गावः समिधानं बुधन्त|	who gleams refulgent with his lovely lustre the kine have waked to meet him when enkindled.
अग्ने याहि दूत्यं मा रिषण्यो देवानछा बरह्मक्र्ता गणेन|	go on thy message to the gods and fail not o agni with their band who pray and worship.
सरस्वतीं मरुतो अश्विनापो यक्षि देवान रत्नधेयायविश्वान|	bring all the gods that they may give us riches sarasvatī the maruts aśvins waters.
तवामग्ने समिधानो वसिष्ठो जरूथं हन यक्षि राये पुरन्धिम|	vasiṣṭha when enkindling thee o agni hath slain jarutha give us wealth in plenty.
पुरुणीथा जातवेदो जरस्व यूयं पात|	sing praise in choral song o jātavedas ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
यस्तिग्मश्र्ङगो वर्षभो न भीम एकः कर्ष्टीश्च्यावयति पर विश्वाः|	he like a bull with sharpened horns terrific singly excites and agitates all the people.
यः शश्वतो अदाशुषो गयस्य परयन्तासिसुष्वितराय वेदः|	thou givest him who largely pours libations his goods who pours not for his own possession.
तवं ह तयदिन्द्र कुत्समावः शुश्रूषमाणस्तन्वा समर्ये|	thou verily indra gavest help to kutsa willingly giving car to him in battle.
दासं यच्छुष्णं कुयवं नयस्मा अरन्धय आर्जुनेयाय शिक्षन|	when aiding Ārjuneya thou subduedst to him both kuyava and the dāsa Śuṣṇa.
तवं धर्ष्णो धर्षता वीतहव्यं परावो विश्वाभिरूतिभिः सुदासम|	o bold one thou with all thine aids hast boldly holpen sudās whose offerings were accepted.
पर पौरुकुत्सिं तरसदस्युमावः कषेत्रसाता वर्त्रहत्येषु पूरुम|	pūru in winning land and slaying foemen and trasadasyu son of purukutsa.
तवं नर्भिर्न्र्मणो देववीतौ भूरीणि वर्त्रा हर्यश्व हंसि|	at the gods banquet herosouled with heroes lord of bay steeds thou slewest many foemen.
तवं नि दस्युं चुमुरिं धुनिं चास्वापयो दभीतये सुहन्तु|	thou sentest in swift death to sleep the dasyu both cumuri and dhuni for dabhīti.
तव चयौत्नानि वज्रहस्त तानि नव यत पुरो नवतिं च सद्यः|	these were thy mighty powers that thunderwielder thou swiftly crushedst nineandninety castles.
निवेशने शततमाविवेषीरहञ्च वर्त्रं नमुचिमुताहन|	thou capturedst the hundredth in thine onslaught thou slewest namuci thou slewest vṛtra.
सना ता त इन्द्र भोजनानि रातहव्याय दाशुषे सुदासे|	old are the blessings indra which thou gavest sudās the worshipper who brought oblations.
वर्ष्णे ते हरी वर्षणा युनज्मि वयन्तु बरह्माणि पुरुशाक वाजम|	for thee the strong i yoke thy strong bay horses may our prayers reach thee and win strength most mighty.
मा ते अस्यां सहसावन परिष्टावघाय भूम हरिवः परादै|	give us not up lord of bay horses victor in this thine own assembly to the wicked.
तरायस्व नोअव्र्केभिर्वरूथैस्तव परियासः सूरिषु सयाम|	deliver us with true and faithful succours dear may we be to thee among the princes.
परियास इत ते मघवन्नभिष्टौ नरो मदेम शरणे सखायः|	may we men maghavan the friends thou lovest near thee be joyful under thy protection.
नि तुर्वशं नि याद्वं शिशीह्यतिथिग्वाय शंस्यं करिष्यन|	fain to fulfil the wish of atithigva humble the pride of turvaśa and yadva.
सद्यश्चिन नु ते मघवन्नभिष्टौ नरः शंसन्त्युक्थशास उक्था|	swiftly in truth o maghavan about thee men skilled in hymning sing their songs and praises.
ये ते हवेभिर्वि पणीन्रदाशन्नस्मान वर्णीष्व युज्याय तस्मै|	elect us also into their assembly who by their calls on thee despoiled the niggards.
एते सतोमा नरां नर्तम तुभ्यमस्मद्र्यञ्चो ददतो मघानि|	thine are these lauds o manliest of heroes lauds which revert to us and give us riches.
तेषामिन्द्र वर्त्रहत्ये शिवो भूः सखा च शूरोअविताच नर्णाम|	favour these indra when they fight with faemen as friend and hero and the heroes helper.
नू इन्द्र शूर सतवमान ऊती बरह्मजूतस्तन्वा वाव्र्धस्व|	now lauded for thine aid heroic indra sped by our prayer wax mighty in thy body.
उप नो वाजान मिमीह्युप सतीन यूयं पात|	apportion to us strength and habitations ye gods protect us evermore with blessings.
परो मात्रया तन्व्र वर्धान न ते महित्वम अन्व अश्नुवन्ति|	men come not nigh thy majesty who growest beyond all bound and measure with thy body.
उभे ते विद्म रजसी पर्थिव्या विष्णो देव तवम परमस्य वित्से|	both thy two regions of the earth o viṣṇu we know thou god knowest the highest also.
न ते विष्णो जायमानो न जातो देव महिम्नः परम अन्तम आप|	none who is born or being born god viṣṇu hath reached the utmost limit of thy grandeur.
उद अस्तभ्ना नाकम रष्वम बर्हन्तं दाधर्थ पराचीं ककुभम पर्थिव्याः|	the vast high vault of heaven hast thou supported and fixed earths eastern pinnacle securely.
इरावती धेनुमती हि भूतं सूयवसिनी मनुषे दशस्या|	rich in sweet food be ye and rich in milchkine with fertile pastures fain to do men service.
वय अस्तभ्ना रोदसी विष्णव एते दाधर्थ पर्थिवीम अभितो मयूखैः|	both these worlds viṣṇu hast thou stayed asunder and firmly fixed the earth with pegs around it.
उरुं यज्ञाय चक्रथुर उलोकं जनयन्ता सूर्यम उषासम अग्निम|	ye have made spacious room for sacrificing by generating sūrya dawn and agni.
दासस्य चिद वर्षशिप्रस्य माया जघ्नथुर नरा पर्तनाज्येषु|	o heroes ye have conquered in your battles even the bulljawed dāsas wiles and magic.
इन्द्राविष्णू दरंहिताः शम्बरस्य नव पुरो नवतिं च शनथिष्टम|	ye have destroyed thou indra and thou viṣṇu Śambaras nineandninety fenced castles.
शतं वर्चिनः सहस्रं च साकं हथो अप्रत्य असुरस्य वीरान|	ye twain smote down a hundred times a thousand resistless heroes of the royal varcin.
इयम मनीषा बर्हती बर्हन्तोरुक्रमा तवसा वर्धयन्ती|	this is the lofty hymn of praise exalting the lords of mighty stride the strong and lofty.
ररे वां सतोमं विदथेषु विष्णो पिन्वतम इषो वर्जनेष्व इन्द्र|	i laud you in the solemn synods viṣṇu pour ye food on us in our camps o indra.
वषट ते विष्णव आस आ कर्णोमि तन मे जुषस्व शिपिविष्ट हव्यम|	o viṣṇu unto thee my lips cry vaṣaṭ let this mine offering sipivista please thee.
वर्धन्तु तवा सुष्टुतयो गिरो मे यूयम पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	may these my songs of eulogy exalt thee preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
इन्द्रं नरो नेमधिता हवन्ते यत पार्या युनजते धियस्ताः|	men call on indra in the armed encounter that he may make the hymns they sing decisive.
शूरो नर्षाता शवसश्चकान आ गोमति वरजे भजात्वं नः|	hero rejoicing in thy might in combat give us a portion of the stall of cattle.
य इन्द्र शुष्मो मघवन ते अस्ति शिक्षा सखिभ्यः पुरुहूतन्र्भ्यः|	grant indra maghavan invoked of many to these my friends the strength which thou possessest.
तवं हि दर्ळ्हा मघवन विचेता अपा वर्धि परिव्र्तं न राधः|	thou maghavan hast rent strong places open unclose for us wise god thy hidden bounty.
इन्द्रो राजा जगतश्चर्षणीनामधि कषमि विषुरूपं यदस्ति|	king of the living world of men is indra of all in varied form that earth containeth.
ततो ददाति दाशुषे वसूनि चोदद राध उपस्तुतश्चिदर्वाक|	thence to the worshipper he giveth riches may he enrich us also when we laud him.
नू चिन न इन्द्रो मघवा सहूती दानो वाजं नि यमते न ऊती|	maghavan indra when we all invoke him bountiful ever sendeth strength to aid us.
अनूना यस्य दक्षिणा पीपाय वामं नर्भ्यो अभिवीता सखिभ्यः|	whose perfect guerdon never failing bringeth wealth to the men to friends the thing they covet.
नू इन्द्र राये वरिवस कर्धी न आ ते मनो वव्र्त्याम मघाय|	quick indra give us room and way to riches and let us bring thy mind to grant us treasures.
गोमदश्वावद रथवद वयन्तो यूयं पात|	that we may win us cars and steeds and cattle preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
आ शुभ्रा यातमश्विना सवश्वा गिरो दस्रा जुजुषाणा युवाकोः|	come radiant aśvins with your noble horses accept your servants hymns ye wonderworkers.
हव्यानि च परतिभ्र्ता वीतं नः|	enjoy oblations which we bring to greet you.
पर वामन्धांसि मद्यान्यस्थुररं गन्तं हविषो वीतये मे|	the gladdening juices stand prepared before you come quickly and partake of mine oblation.
तिरो अर्यो हवनानि शरुतं नः|	pass by the calling of our foe and bear us.
पर वां रथो मनोजवा इयर्ति तिरो रजांस्यश्विना शतोतिः|	your chariot with a hundred aids o aśvins beareth you swift as thought across the regions.
अस्मभ्यं सूर्यावसू इयानः|	speeding to us o ye whose wealth is sūrya.
अयं ह यद वां देवया उ अद्रिरूर्ध्वो विवक्ति सोमसुद युवभ्याम|	what time this stone of yours the gods adorer upraised sounds forth for you as somapresser.
आ वल्गू विप्रो वव्र्तीत हव्यैः|	let the priest bring you fair ones through oblations.
चित्रं ह यद वां भोजनं नवस्ति नयत्रये महिष्वन्तं युयोतम|	the nourishment ye have is truly wondrous ye gave thereof a quickening store to atri.
यो वामोमानं दधते परियः सन|	who being dear to you receives your favour.
उत तयद वां जुरते अश्विना भूच्च्यवानाय परतीत्यं हविर्दे|	that gift which all may gain ye gave cyavāna when he grew old who offered you oblations.
अधि यद वर्प इतूति धत्थः|	when ye bestowed on him enduring beauty.
उत तयं भुज्युमश्विना सखायो मध्ये जहुर्दुरेवासः समुद्रे|	what time his wicked friends abandoned bhujyu o aśvins in the middle of the ocean.
निरीं पर्षदरावा यो युवाकुः|	your horse delivered him your faithful servant.
वर्काय चिज्जसमानाय शक्तमुत शरुतं शयवे हूयमाना|	ye lent your aid to vrka when exhausted and listened when invoked to Śayus calling.
यावघ्न्यामपिन्वतमपो न सतर्यं चिच्छक्त्यश्विनाशचीभिः|	ye made the cow pour forth her milk like water and aśvins strengthened with your strength the barren.
एष सय कारुर्जरते सूक्तैरग्रे बुधान उषसां सुमन्मा|	with his fair hymns this singer too extols you waking with glad thoughts at the break of morning.
इषा तं वर्धदघ्न्या पयोभिर्यूयं पात|	may the cow nourish him with milk to feed llim preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
आ मां मित्रावरुणेह रक्षतं कुलाययद विश्वयन मा न आ गन|	o mitravaruna guard and protect me here let not that come to me which nests within and swells.
अजकावं दुर्द्र्शीकं तिरो दधे मा मां पद्येन रपसा विदत तसरुः|	i drive afar the scorpion hateful to the sight let not the winding worm touch me and wound my foot.
यद विजामन परुषि वन्दनं भुवदष्ठीवन्तौ परि कुल्फौ च देहत|	eruption that appears upon the twofold joints and that which overspreads the ankles and the knees.
अग्निष टच्छोचन्नप बाधतामितो मा माम्पद्येन|	may the refulgent agni banish far away let not the winding worm touch me and wound my foot.
यच्छल्मलौ भवति यन नदीषु यदोषधीभ्यः परि जायते विषम|	the poison that is formed upon the salmali that which is found in streams that which the plants produce.
विश्वे देवा निरितस्तत सुवन्तु मा मां पद्येन|	all this may all the gods banish and drive away let not the winding worm touch me and wound my foot.
याः परवतो निवत उद्वत उदन्वतीरनुदकाश्च याः|	the steep declivities the valleys and the heights the channels full of water and the waterless.
ता अस्मभ्यं पयसा पिन्वमानाः शिवा देवीरशिपदा भवन्तु सर्वा नद्यो अशिमिदा भवन्तु|	may those who swell with water gracious goddesses never afflict us with the sipada disease may all the rivers keep us free from simida.
रदत पथो वरुणः सूर्याय परार्णांसि समुद्रिया नदीनाम|	varuna cut a pathway out for sūrya and led the watery floods of rivers onward.
सर्गो न सर्ष्टो अर्वतीरतायञ्चकार महीरवनीरहभ्यः|	the mares as in a race speed on in order he made great channels for the days to follow.
आत्मा ते वातो रज आ नवीनोत पशुर्न भूर्णिर्यवसे ससवान|	the wind thy breath hath sounded through the region like a wild beast that seeks his food in pastures.
अन्तर्मही बर्हती रोदसीमे विश्वा ते धाम वरुण परियाणि|	within these two exalted earth and heaven o varuṇa are all the forms thou lovest.
परि सपशो वरुणस्य समदिष्टा उभे पश्यन्ति रोदसी सुमेके|	varuṇas spies sent forth upon their errand survey the two worldhalves well formed and fashioned.
रतावानः कवयो यज्ञधीराः परचेतसो य इषयन्त मन्म|	wise are they holy skilled in sacrifices the furtherers of the praisesongs of the prudent.
उवाच मे वरुणो मेधिराय तरिः सप्त नामाघ्न्या बिभर्ति|	to me who understand hath varuṇa spoken the names borne by the cow are three times seven.
विद्वान पदस्य गुह्या न वोचद युगाय विप्र उपराय शिक्षन|	the sapient god knowing the places secret shall speak as twere to teach the race that cometh.
तिस्रो दयावो निहिता अन्तरस्मिन तिस्रो भूमीरुपराः षड्विधानाः|	on him three heavens rest and are supported and the three earths are there in sixfold order.
गर्त्सो राजा वरुणश्चक्र एतं दिवि परेङखंहिरण्ययं शुभे कम|	the wise king varuṇa hath made in heaven that golden swing to cover it with glory.
अव सिन्धुं वरुणो दयौरिव सथाद दरप्सो न शवेतो मर्गस्तुविष्मान|	like varuṇa from heaven he sinks in sindhu like a whiteshining spark a strong wild creature.
गम्भीरशंसो रजसो विमानः सुपारक्षत्रः सतो अस्य राजा|	ruling in depths and meting out the region great saving power hath he this worlds controller.
यो मर्ळयाति चक्रुषे चिदागो वयं सयाम वरुणे अनागाः|	before this varuṇa may we be sinless him who shows mercy even to the sinner.
अनु वरतान्यदितेरधन्तो यूयं पात|	while we are keeping aditis ordinances preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
पर्जन्याय पर गायत दिवस पुत्राय मीळ्हुषे|	sing forth and laud parjanya son of heaven who sends the gift of rain.
स नो यवसमिछतु|	may he provide our pasturage.
यो गर्भमोषधीनां गवां कर्णोत्यर्वताम|	parjanya is the god who forms in kine in mares in plants of earth.
पर्जन्यःपुरुषीणाम|	and womankind the germ of life.
तस्मा इदास्ये हविर्जुहोता मधुमत्तमम|	offer and pour into his mouth oblation rich in savoury juice.
इळां नः संयतं करत|	may he for ever give us food.
शं न इन्द्राग्नी भवतामवोभिः शं न इन्द्रावरुणा रातहव्या|	befriend us with their aids indra and agni indra and varuṇa who receive oblations.
शमिन्द्रासोमा सुविताय शं योः शं न इन्द्रापूषणा वाजसातौ|	indra and soma give health strength and comfort indra and pūṣan be our help in battle.
शं नो भगः शमु नः शंसो अस्तु शं नः पुरन्धिःशमु सन्तु रायः|	auspicious friends to us be bhaga sathsa auspicious be purandhi aid all riches.
शं नः सत्यस्य सुयमस्य शंसःशं नो अर्यमा पुरुजातो अस्तु|	the blessing of the true and wellconducted and aryaman in many forms apparent.
शं नो धाता शमु धर्ता नो अस्तु शं न उरूची भवतुस्वधाभिः|	kind unto us he maker and sustainer and the farreaching pair with godlike natures.
शं रोदसी बर्हती शं नो अद्रिः शं नोदेवानां सुहवानि सन्तु|	auspicious unto us be earth and heaven the mountain and the gods fair invocations.
शं नो अग्निर्ज्योतिरनीको अस्तु शं नो मित्रावरुणावश्विना शम|	favour us agni with his face of splendour and varuva and mitra and the aśvins.
शं नः सुक्र्तां सुक्र्तानि सन्तु शं न इषिरोभि वातु वातः|	favour us noble actions of the pious impetuous vita blow on us with favour.
शं नो दयावाप्र्थिवी पूर्वहूतौ शमन्तरिक्षं दर्शयेनो अस्तु|	early invoked may heaven and earth be friendly and airs midregion good for us to look on.
शं न ओषधीर्वनिनो भवन्तु शं नो रजसस पतिरस्तु जिष्णुः|	to us may herbs and foresttrees be gracious gracious the lord victorious of the region.
शं न इन्द्रो वसुभिर्देवो अस्तु शमादित्येभिर्वरुणः सुशंसः|	be the god indra with the vasus friendly and with Ādityas varuṇa who blesseth.
शं नो रुद्रो रुद्रेभिर्जलाषः शं नस्त्वष्टा गनाभिरिह शर्णोतु|	kind with the rudras be the healer rudra and with the dames may tvaṣṭar kindly listen.
शं नः सोमो भवतु बरह्म शं नः शं नो गरावाणःशमु सन्तु यज्ञाः|	blest unto us be soma and devotions blest be the sacrifice the stones for pressing.
शं नः सवरूणां मितयो भवन्तु शं नः परस्वः शं वस्तु वेदिः|	blest be the fixing of the sacred pillars blest be the tender grass and blest the altar.
शं नः सूर्य उरुचक्षा उदेतु शं नश्चतस्रः परदिशो भवन्तु|	may the farseeing sun rise up to bless us be the four quarters of the sky auspicious.
शं नः पर्वता धरुवयो भवन्तु शं नः सिन्धवः शमु सन्त्वापः|	auspicious be the firmlyseated mountains auspicious be the rivers and the waters.
शं नो अदितिर्भवतु वरतेभिः शं नो भवन्तु मरुतः सवर्काः|	may adid through holy works be gracioas and may the maruts loud in song be friendly.
शं नो विष्णुः शं उ पूषा नो अस्तु शं नो भवित्रं शं वस्तु वायुः|	may viṣṇu give felicity and pūṣan the air that cherisheth our life and vāyu.
शं नो देवः सविता तरायमाणः शं नो भवन्तूषसो विभातीः|	prosper us savitar the god who rescues and let the radiant mornings be propitious.
शं नः पर्जन्यो भवतु परजाभ्यः शं नःक्षेत्रस्य पतिरस्तु शम्भुः|	auspicious to all creatures be parjanya auspicious be the fields benign protector.
शं नो देवा विश्वदेवा भवन्तु शं सरस्वती सह धीभिरस्तु|	may all the fellowship of gods befriend us sarasvatī with holy thoughts be gracious.
शमभिषाचः शमु रातिषाचः शं नो दिव्याः पार्थिवाः शं नो अप्याः|	friendly be they the liberal ones who seek us yea those who dwell in heaven on earth in waters.
शं नः सत्यस्य पतयो भवन्तु शं नो अर्वन्तः शमु सन्तु गावः|	may the great lords of truth protect and aid us blest to us be our horses and our cattle.
शं न रभवः सुक्र्तः सुहस्ताः शं नो भवन्तु पितरो हवेषु|	kind be the pious skilfulhanded Ṛbhus kind be the fathers at our invocations.
शं नो अज एकपाद देवो अस्तु शं नोअहिर्बुध्न्यः शं समुद्रः|	may ajaekapād the god be gracious gracious the dragon of the deep and ocean.
शं नो अपां नपात पेरुरस्तु शं नः पर्श्निर्भवतु देवगोपा|	gracious be he the swelling child of waters gracious be pṛśni who hath gods to guard her.
आदित्या रुद्रा वसवो जुषन्तेदं बरह्म करियमाणं नवीयः|	so may the rudras vasus and Ādityas accept the new hymn which we now are making.
शर्ण्वन्तु नि दिव्याः पार्थिवासो गोजाता उत ये यज्ञियासः|	may all the holy ones of earth and heaven and the cows offipring hear our invocation.
ये देवानां यज्ञिया यज्ञियानां मनोर्यजत्रा अम्र्ता रतज्ञाः|	they who of holy gods are very holy immortal knowing law whom man must worship.
ते नो रासन्तामुरुगायमद्य यूयं पात|	may these today give us broad paths to travel preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
आ वां राजानावध्वरे वव्र्त्यां हव्येभिरिन्द्रावरुणा नमोभिः|	kings indravaruṇa i would turn you hither to this our sacrifice with gifts and homage.
पर वां घर्ताची बाह्वोर्दधाना परि तमना विषुरूपा जिगाति|	held in both arms the ladle dropping fatness goes of itself to you whose forms are varied.
युवो राष्ट्रं बर्हदिन्वति दयौर्यौ सेत्र्भिररज्जुभिः सिनीथः|	dyaus quickens and promotes your high dominion who bind with bonds not wrought of rope or cordage.
परि नो हेळो वरुणस्य वर्ज्या उरुं न इन्द्रः कर्णवदु लोकम|	far from us still be varuṇas displeasure may indra give us spacious room to dwell in.
कर्तं नो यज्ञं विदथेषु चारुं कर्तं बरह्माणि सूरिषुप्रशस्ता|	make ye our sacrifice fair amid the assemblies make ye our prayers approved among our princes.
उपो रयिर्देवजूतो न एतु पर णः सपार्हाभिरूतिभिस्तिरेतम|	may godsent riches come for our possession further ye us with your delightful succours.
अस्मे इन्द्रावरुणा विश्ववारं रयिं धत्तं वसुमन्तं पुरुक्षुम|	o indravaruṇa vouchsafe us riches with store of treasure food and every blessing.
पर य आदित्यो अन्र्ता मिनात्यमिता शूरो दयते वसूनि|	for the Āditya banisher of falsehood the hero dealeth wealth in boundless plenty.
इयमिन्द्रं वरुणमष्ट मे गीः परावत तोके तनये तूतुजाना|	may this my song reach varuṇa and indra and strongly urging win me sons and offspring.
सुरत्नासो देववीतिं गमेम यूयं पात|	to the gods banquet may we go with riches preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
उदु जयोतिरम्र्तं विश्वजन्यं विश्वानरः सविता देवो अश्रेत|	savitar god of all men hath sent upward his light designed for all mankind immortal.
करत्वा देवानामजनिष्ट चक्षुराविरकर्भुवनंविश्वमुषाः|	through the gods power that eye was first created dawn hath made all the universe apparent.
पर मे पन्था देवयाना अद्र्श्रन्नमर्धन्तो वसुभिरिष्क्र्तासः|	i see the paths which gods are wont to travel innocuous paths made ready by the vasus.
अभूदु केतुरुषसः पुरस्तात परतीच्यागादधि हर्म्येभ्यः|	eastward the flag of dawn hath been uplifted she hath come hither oer the tops of houses.
तानीदहानि बहुलान्यासन या पराचीनमुदिता सूर्यस्य|	great is in truth the number of the mornings which were aforetime at the suns uprising.
यतः परि जार इवाचरन्त्युषो दद्र्क्षे न पुनर्यतीव|	since thou o dawn hast been beheld repairing as to thy love as one no more to leave him.
त इद देवानां सधमाद आसन्न्र्तावानः कवयः पूर्व्यासः|	they were the gods companions at the banquet the ancient sages true to law eternal.
गूळ्हं जयोतिः पितरो अन्वविन्दन सत्यमन्त्रा अजनयन्नुषासम|	the fathers found the light that lay in darkness and with effectual words begat the morning.
समान ऊर्वे अधि संगतासः सं जानते न यतन्ते मिथस्ते|	meeting together in the same enclosure they strive not ofone mind one with another.
ते देवानां न मिनन्ति वरतान्यमर्धन्तो वसुभिर्यादमानाः|	they never break the gods eternal statutes and injure none in rivalry with vasus.
परति तवा सतोमैरीळते वसिष्ठा उषर्बुधः सुभगे तुष्टुवांसः|	extolling thee blest goddess the vasisthas awake at early mom with lauds implore thee.
गवां नेत्री वाजपत्नी न उछोषः सुजाते परथमा जरस्व|	leader of kine and queen of all that strengthens shine come as first to us o highborn morning.
एषा नेत्री राधसः सून्र्तानामुषा उछन्ती रिभ्यते वसिष्ठैः|	she bringeth bounty and sweet charm of voices the flushing dawn is sung by the vasisthas.
दीर्घश्रुतं रयिमस्मे दधाना यूयं पात|	giving us riches famed to distant places preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
उपो रुरुचे युवतिर्न योषा विश्वं जीवं परसुवन्ती चरायै|	she hath shone brightly like a youthful woman stirring to motion every living creature.
अभूदग्निः समिधे मानुषाणामकर्ज्योतिर्बाधमाना तमांसि|	agni hath come to feed on mortal fuel she hath made light and chased away the darkness.
विश्वं परतीची सप्रथा उदस्थाद रुशद वासो बिभ्रतीशुक्रमश्वैत|	turned to this all farspreading she hath risen and shone in brightness with white robes about her.
हिरण्यवर्णा सुद्र्शीकसन्द्र्ग गवां मातानेत्र्यह्नामरोचि|	she hath beamed forth lovely with golden colours mother of kine guide of the days she bringeth.
देवानां चक्षुः सुभगा वहन्ती शवेतं नयन्ती सुद्र्शीकमश्वम|	bearing the gods own eye auspicious lady leading her courser white and fair to look on.
उषा अदर्शि रश्मिभिर्व्यक्ता चित्रामघा विश्वमनु परभूता|	distinguished by her beanis dawn shines apparent come forth to all the world with wondrous treasure.
अन्तिवामा दूरे अमित्रमुछोर्वीं गव्यूतिमभयं कर्धी नः|	draw nigh with wealth and dawn away the foeman prepare for us wide pasture free from danger.
यावय दवेष आ भरा वसूनि चोदय राधो गर्णते मघोनि|	drive away those who hate us bring us riches pour bounty opulent lady on the singer.
अस्मे शरेष्ठेभिर्भानुभिर्वि भाह्युषो देवि परतिरन्ती न आयुः|	send thy most excellent beams to shine and light us giving us lengthened days o dawn o goddess.
इषं च नो दधती विश्ववारे गोमदश्वावद रथवच्च राधः|	granting us food thou who hast all things precious and bounty rich in chariots kine and horses.
यां तवा दिवो दुहितर्वर्धयन्त्युषः सुजाते मतिभिर्वसिष्ठाः|	o uṣas noblyborn daughter of heaven whom the vasisthas with their hymns make mighty.
सास्मासु धा रयिं रष्वं बर्हन्तं यूयं पात|	bestow thou on us vast and glorious riches preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
उपसद्याय मीळ्हुष आस्ये जुहुता हविः|	offer oblations in his mouth the bounteous gods whom we must serve.
यो नो नेदिष्ठमाप्यम|	his who is nearest kin to us.
यः पञ्च चर्षणीरभि निषसाद दमेदमे|	who for the fivefold peoples take hath seated him in every home.
कविर्ग्र्हपतिर्युवा|	wise youthful master of the house.
स नो वेदो अमात्यमग्नी रक्षतु विश्वतः|	on all sides may that agni guard our household folk and property.
उतास्मान पात्वंहसः|	may he deliver us from woe.
नवं नु सतोममग्नये दिवः शयेनाय जीजनम|	i have begotten this new hymn for agni falcon of the sky.
वस्वः कुविद वनाति नः|	will he not give us of his wealth.
सपार्हा यस्य शरियो दर्शे रयिर्वीरवतो यथा|	whose lories when he glows in front of sacrite are fair to see.
अग्रे यज्ञस्य शोचतः|	like wealth of one with hero sons.
सेमां वेतु वषट्क्र्तिमग्निर्जुषत नो गिरः|	may he enjoy this hallowed gift agni accept our songs who bears.
यजिष्ठो हव्यवाहनः|	oblations best of worshippers.
नि तवा नक्ष्य विश्पते दयुमन्तं देव धीमहि|	lord of the house whom men must seek we set thee down o worshipped onel.
सुवीरमग्न आहुत|	bright rich in heroes agni god.
कषप उस्रश्च दीदिहि सवग्नयस्त्वया वयम|	shine forth at night and morn through thee with fires are we provided well.
सुवीरस्त्वमस्मयुः|	thou rich in heroes art our friend.
उप तवा सातये नरो विप्रासो यन्ति धीतिभिः|	the men come near thee for their gain the singers with their songs of praise.
उपाक्षरासहस्रिणी|	speech thousandfold comes near to thee.
अग्नी रक्षांसि सेधति शुक्रशोचिरमर्त्यः|	bright purifier meet for praise immortal with refulgent glow.
शुचिः पावक ईड्यः|	agni drives rākṣasas away.
स नो राधांस्या भरेशानः सहसो यहो|	as such bring us abundant wealth young child of strength for this thou canst.
भगश्च दातुवार्यम|	may bhaga give us what is choice.
तवमग्ने वीरवद यशो देवश्च सविता भगः|	thou agni givest hero fame bhaga and savitar the god.
दितिश्चदाति वार्यम|	and did give us what is good.
अग्ने रक्षा णो अंहसः परति षम देव रीषतः|	agni preserve us from distress consume our enemies o god.
तपिष्ठैरजरो दह|	eternal with the hottest flames.
अधा मही न आयस्यनाध्र्ष्टो नर्पीतये|	and irresistible be thou a mighty iron fort to us.
पूर्भवा शतभुजिः|	with hundred walls for mans defence.
तवं नः पाह्यंहसो दोषावस्तरघायतः|	do thou preserve us eve and morn from sorrow from the wicked men.
दिवा नक्तमदाभ्य|	infallible by day and night.
अग्ने भव सुषमिधा समिद्ध उत बर्हिरुर्विया वि सत्र्णीताम|	agni be kindled well with proper fuel and let the grass be scattered wide about thee.
उत दवार उशतीर्वि शरयन्तामुत देवानुशत आ वहेह|	let the impatient portals be thrown open bring thou the gods impatient to come hither.
अग्ने वीहि हविषा वक्षि देवान सवध्वरा कर्णुहि जातवेदः|	taste agni serve the gods with our oblation offer good sacrifices jātavedas.
सवध्वरा करति जातवेदा यक्षद देवानम्र्तान पिप्रयच्च|	let jātavedas pay fair sacrifices worship andgratify the gods immortal.
वंस्व विश्वा वार्याणि परचेतः सत्या भवन्त्वाशिषो नोद्य|	wise god win for us things that are allgoodly and let the prayers we pray today be fruitful.
तवामु ते दधिरे हव्यवाहं देवासो अग्न ऊर्ज आ नपातम|	thee even thee the son of strength o agni those gods have made the bearer of oblations.
ते ते देवाय दाशतः सयाम महो नो रत्ना वि दध इयानः|	to thee the god may we perform our worship do thou besought grant us abundant riches.
एना वो अग्निं नमसोर्जो नपातमा हुवे|	with this my reverent hymn i call agni for you the son of strength.
परियं चेतिष्ठमरतिं सवध्वरं विश्वस्य दूतमम्र्तम|	dear wisest envoy served with noble sacrifice immortal messenger of all.
स योजते अरुषा विश्वभोजसा स दुद्रवत सवाहुतः|	his two red horses allsupporting let him yoke let him wellworshipped urge them fast.
सुब्रह्मा यज्ञः सुशमी वसूनां देवं राधो जनानाम|	then hath the sacrifice good prayers and happy end and heavenly gift of wealth to men.
उदस्य शोचिरस्थादाजुह्वानस्य मीळ्हुषः|	the flame of him the bountiful the muchinvoked hath mounted up.
उद धूमासोरुषासो दिविस्प्र्शः समग्निमिन्धते नरः|	and his redcoloured smokeclouds reach and touch the sky the men are kindling agni well.
तं तवा दूतं कर्ण्महे यशस्तमं देवाना वीतये वह|	thee thee most glorious one we make our messenger bring the gods hither to the feast.
विश्वा सूनो सहसो मर्तभोजना रास्व तद यत तवेमहे|	give us o son of strength all food that fcedeth man give that for which we pray to thee.
तवमग्ने गर्हपतिस्त्वं होता नो अध्वरे|	thou agni art the homesteads lord our herald at the sacrifice.
तवं पोता विश्ववार परचेता यक्षि वेषि च वार्यम|	lord of all boons thou art the cleanser and a sage pay worship and enjoy the good.
कर्धि रत्नं यजमानाय सुक्रतो तवं हि रत्नधा असि|	give riches to the sacrificer o most wise for thou art he who granteth wealth.
आन रते शिशीहि विश्वं रत्विजं सुशंसो यश्च दक्षते|	inspire with zeal each priest at this our solemn rite all who are skilled in singing praise.
तवे अग्ने सवाहुत परियासः सन्तु सूरयः|	o agni who art worshipped well dear let our princes he to thee.
यन्तारो ये मघवानो जनानामूर्वान दयन्त गोनाम|	our wealthy patrons who are governors of men who part as gifts their stalls of kine.
येषामिळा घर्तहस्ता दुरोण आनपि पराता निषीदति|	they in whose home her hand bearing the sacred oil iḷā sits down wellsatisfied.
तांस्त्रायस्व सहस्य दरुहो निदो यछा नः शर्म दीर्घश्रुत|	guard them victorious god from slander and from harm give us a refuge famed afar.
स मन्द्रया च जिह्वया वह्निरासा विदुष्टरः|	do thou a priest with pleasant tongue most wise and very near to us.
अग्ने रयिं मघवद्भ्यो न आ वह हव्यदातिं च सूदय|	agni bring riches hither to our liberal chiefs and speed the oflering of our gifts.
ये राधांसि ददत्यश्व्या मघा कामेन शरवसो महः|	they who bestow as bounty plenteous wealth of steeds moved by desire of great renown.
तानंहसः पिप्र्हि पर्त्र्भिष टवं शतं पूर्भिर्यविष्ठ्य|	do thou with saving help preserve them from distress most youthful with a hundred forts.
देवो वो दरविणोदाः पूर्णां विवष्ट्यासिचम|	the god who gives your wealth demands a full libation poured to him.
उद वा सिञ्चध्वमुप वा पर्णध्वमादिद वो देव ओहते|	pour ye it forth then fill the vessel full again then doth the god pay heed to you.
तं होतारमध्वरस्य परचेतसं वह्निं देवा अक्र्ण्वत|	him have the gods appointed priest of sacrifice oblationbearer passing wise.
दधाति रत्नं विधते सुवीर्यमग्निर्जनाय दाशुषे|	agni gives wealth and valour to the worshipper to folk who offer up their gifts.
न सोम इन्द्रमसुतो ममाद नाब्रह्माणो मघवानं सुतासः|	soma unpressed neer gladdened liberal indra no juices pressed without a prayer have pleased him.
तस्मा उक्थं जनये यज्जुजोषन नर्वन नवीयः शर्णवद यथा नः|	i generate a laud that shall delight him new and heroic so that he may hear us.
उक्थउक्थे सोम इन्द्रं ममाद नीथेनीथे मघवानं सुतासः|	at every laud the soma gladdens indra pressed juices please him as each psalm is chanted.
यदीं सबाधः पितरं न पुत्राः समानदक्षा अवसे हवन्ते|	what time the priests with one united effort call him to aid as sons invoke their father.
चकार ता कर्णवन नूनमन्या यानि बरुवन्ति वेधसः सुतेषु|	these deeds he did let him achieve new exploits such as the priests declare at their libations.
जनीरिव पतिरेकः समानो नि माम्र्जे पुर इन्द्रःसु सर्वाः|	indra hath taken and possessed all castles like as one common husband doth his spouses.
एवा तमाहुरुत शर्ण्व इन्द्र एको विभक्ता तरणिर्मघानाम|	even thus have they declared him famed is indra as conqueror sole distributer of treasures.
मिथस्तुर ऊतयो यस्य पूर्वीरस्मे भद्राणि सश्चतप्रियाणि|	whose many succours come in close succession may dear delightful benefits attend us.
एवा वसिष्ठ इन्द्रमूतये नॄन कर्ष्टीनां वर्षभं सुते गर्णाति|	thus to bring help to men vasiṣṭha laudeth indra the peoples hero at libation.
सहस्रिण उप नो माहि वाजान यूयं पात|	bestow upon us strength and wealth in thousands preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
उदु षय देवः सविता ययाम हिरण्ययीममतिं यामशिश्रेत|	on high hath savitar this god extended the golden lustre which he spreads around him.
नूनं भगो हव्यो मानुषेभिर्वि यो रत्ना पुरूवसुर्दधाति|	now now must bhaga be invoked by mortals lord of great riches who distributes treasures.
उदु तिष्ठ सवितः शरुध्यस्य हिरण्यपाणे परभ्र्ताव रतस्य|	rise up o savitar whose hands are golden and hear this man while sacrifice is offered.
वयुर्वीं पर्थ्वीममतिं सर्जान आ नर्भ्यो मर्तभोजनं सुवानः|	spreading afar thy broad and wide effulgence and bringing mortal men the food that feeds them.
अपि षटुतः सविता देवो अस्तु यमा चिद विश्वे वसवो गर्णन्ति|	let savitar the god he hymned with praises to whom the vasus even all sing glory.
स न सतोमान नमस्यश्चनो धाद विश्वेभिः पातु पायुभिर्नि सूरीन|	sweet be our lauds to him whose due is worship may he with all protection guard our princes.
अभि यं देव्यदितिर्ग्र्णाति सवं देवस्य सवितुर्जुषाणा|	even he whom aditi the goddess praises rejoicing in god savitars incitement.
अभि सम्राजो वरुणो गर्णन्त्यभि मित्रासो अर्यमा सजोषाः|	even he who praise the high imperial rulers varuṇa mitra aryaman sing in concert.
अभि ये मिथो वनुषः सपन्ते रातिं दिवो रातिषाचः पर्थिव्याः|	they who come emulous to our oblation dispensing bounty from the earth and heaven.
अहिर्बुध्न्य उत नः शर्णोतु वरूत्र्येकधेनुभिर्नि पातु|	may they and ahibudhnya hear our calling guard us varūtrī with the ekadhenus.
अनु तन नो जास्पतिर्मंसीष्ट रत्नं देवस्य सवितुरियानः|	this may the lord of life entreated grant usthe wealth which savitar the god possesses.
भगमुग्रोअवसे जोहवीति भगमनुग्रो अध याति रत्नम|	the mighty calls on bhaga for protection on bhaga calls the weak to give him riches.
शं नो भवन्तु वाजिनो हवेषु देवताता मितद्रवः सवर्काः|	bless us the vajins when we call while slowly they move strong singers to the gods assembly.
जम्भयन्तोअहिं वर्कं रक्षांसि सनेम्यस्मद युयवन्नमीवाः|	crushing the wolf the serpent and the demons may they completely banish all affliction.
वाजेवाजेअवत वाजिनो नो धनेषु विप्रा अम्र्ता रतज्ञाः|	deepskilled in law eternal deathless singers o vajins help us in each fray for booty.
अस्य मध्वः पिबत मादयध्वं तर्प्ता यात पथिभिर्देवयानैः|	drink of this meath he satisfied be joyful then go on paths which gods are wont to travel.
पर कषोदसा धायसा सस्र एषा सरस्वती धरुणमायसी पूः|	this stream sarasvatī with fostering current comes forth our sure defence our fort of iron.
परबाबधाना रथ्येव याति विश्वा अपो महिना सिन्धुरन्याः|	as on a car the flood flows on surpassing in majesty and might all other waters.
एकाचेतत सरस्वती नदीनां शुचिर्यती गिरिभ्य आ समुद्रात|	pure in her course from mountains to the ocean alone of streams sarasvatī hath listened.
रायश्चेतन्ती भुवनस्य भूरेर्घ्र्तं पयो दुदुहे नाहुषाय|	thinking of wealth and the great world of creatures she poured for nahuṣa her milk and fatness.
स वाव्र्धे नर्यो योषणासु वर्षा शिशुर्व्र्षभो यज्ञियासु|	friendly to man he grew among the women a strong young steer amid the holy ladies.
स वाजिनं मघवद्भ्यो दधाति वि सातये तन्वं माम्र्जीत|	he gives the fleet steed to our wealthy princes and decks their bodies for success in battle.
उत सया नः सरस्वती जुषाणोप शरवत सुभगा यज्णे अस्मिन|	may this sarasvatī be pleased and listen at this our sacrifice auspicious lady.
मितज्ञुभिर्नमस्यैरियाना राया युजा चिदुत्तरा सखिभ्यः|	when we with reverence on our knees implore her closeknit to wealth most kind to those she loveth.
इमा जुह्वाना युष्मदा नमोभिः परति सतोमं सरस्वति जुषस्व|	these offerings have ye made with adoration say this sarasvatī and accept our praises.
तव शर्मन परियतमे दधाना उप सथेयाम शरणं न वर्क्षम|	and placing us under thy dear protection may we approach thee as a tree for shelter.
अयमु ते सरस्वति वसिष्ठो दवाराव रतस्य सुभगे वयावः|	for thee o blest sarasvatī vasiṣṭha hath here unbarred the doors d sacred order.
वर्ध शुभ्रे सतुवते रासि वाजान यूयं पात|	wax bright one and give strength to him who lauds thee preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
रभुक्षणो वाजा मादयध्वमस्मे नरो मघवानः सुतस्य|	ye liberal heroes vājas and Ṛbhukṣans come and delight you with our flowing soma.
आ वोअर्वाचः करतवो न यातां विभ्वो रथं नर्यं वर्तयन्तु|	may your strength vibhus as ye come to meet us turn hitherward your car that brings men profit.
रभुरभुभिरभि वः सयाम विभ्वो विभुभिः शवसा शवांसि|	may we as Ṛbhu with your Ṛbhus conquer strength with our strength as vibhus with the vibhus.
वाजो अस्मानवतु वाजसाताविन्द्रेण युजा तरुषेमव्र्त्रम|	may vāja aid us in the fight for booty and helped by indra may we quell the foeman.
ते चिद धि पूर्वीरभि सन्ति शासा विश्वानर्य उपरताति वन्वन|	for they rule many tribes with high dominion and conquer all their foes in close encounter.
इन्द्रो विभ्वान रभुक्षा वाजो अर्यः शत्रोर्मिथत्या कर्णवन वि नर्म्णम|	may indra vibhvan vāja and Ṛbhukṣan destroy by turns the wicked foemans valour.
नू देवासो वरिवः कर्तना नो भूत नो विश्वेअवसे सजोषाः|	now deities give us ample room and freedom be all of you oneminded our protection.
समस्मे इषं वसवो ददीरन यूयं पात|	so let the vasus grant us strength and vigour preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
पराग्नये तवसे भरध्वं गिरं दिवो अरतये पर्थिव्याः|	bring forth your song of praise to mighty agni the speedy messenger of earth and heaven.
यो विश्वेषामम्र्तानामुपस्थे वैश्वानरो वाव्र्धे जाग्र्वद्भिः|	vaiśvānara who with those who wake hath waxen great in the lap of all the gods immortal.
पर्ष्टो दिवि धाय्यग्निः पर्थिव्यां नेता सिन्धूनां वर्षभ सतियानाम|	sought in the heavens on earth is agni stablished leader of rivers bull of standing waters.
स मानुषीरभि विशो वि भाति वैश्वानरो वाव्र्धानो वरेण|	vaiśvānara when he hath grown in glory shines on the tribes of men with light and treasure.
तवद भिया विश आयन्नसिक्नीरसमना जहतीर्भोजनानि|	for fear of thee forth fled the darkhued races scattered abroad deserting their possessions.
वैश्वानर पूरवे शोशुचानः पुरो यदग्ने दरयन्नदीदेः|	when glowing o vaiśvānara for pūru thou agni didst light up and rend their castles.
तव तरिधातु पर्थिवी उत दयौर्वैश्वानर वरतमग्ने सचन्त|	agni vaiśvānara both earth and heaven submit them to thy threefold jurisdiction.
तवं भासा रोदसी आ ततन्थाजस्रेण शोचिषा शोशुचानः|	refulgent in thine undecaying lustre thou hast invested both the worlds with splendour.
तवामग्ने हरितो वावशाना गिरः सचन्ते धुनयो घर्ताचीः|	agni the tawny horses loudly neighing our resonant hymns that drop with oil attend thee.
पतिं कर्ष्टीनां रथ्यं रयीणां वैश्वानरमुषसां केतुमह्नाम|	lord of the tribes our charioteer of riches ensign of days vaiśvānara of mornings.
तवे असुर्यं वसवो नय रण्वन करतुं हि ते मित्रमहो जुषन्त|	in thee o bright as mitra vasus seated the might of aduras for they loved thy spirit.
तवं दस्यून्रोकसो अग्न आज उरु जयोतिर्जनयन्नार्याय|	thou dravest dasyus from their home o agni and broughtest forth broad light to light the Ārya.
स जायमानः परमे वयोमन वायुर्न पाथः परि पासि सद्यः|	born in the loftiest heaven thou in a moment reachest like wind the place where gods inhabit.
तवं भुवना जनयन्नभि करन्नपत्याय जातवेदो दशस्यन|	thou favouring thine offspring roaredst loudly when giving life to creatures jātavedas.
तामग्ने अस्मे इषमेरयस्व वैश्वानर दयुमतीं जातवेदः|	send us that strength vaiśvānara send it agni that strength o jātavedas full of splendour.
यया राधः पिन्वसि विश्ववार पर्थु शरवो दाशुषे मर्त्याय|	wherewith allbounteous god thou pourest riches as fame widespreading on the man who offers.
तं नो अग्ने मघवद्भ्यः पुरुक्षुं रयिं नि वाजं शरुत्यं युवस्व|	agni bestow upon our chiefs and nobles that famous power that wealth which feedeth many.
वैश्वानर महि नः शर्म यछ रुद्रेभिरग्ने वसुभिः सजोषाः|	accordant with the vasus and the rudras agni vaiśvānara give us sure protection.
यं तरायध्व इदमइदं देवासो यं च नयथ|	whomso ye rescue here and there whomso ye guide o deities.
तस्मा अग्ने वरुण मित्रार्यमन मरुतः शर्म यछत|	to him give shelter agni mitra varuṇa ye maruts and thou aryaman.
युष्माकं देवा अवसाहनि परिय ईजानस्तरति दविषः|	through your kind favour gods on some auspicious day the worshipper subdues his foes.
पर स कषयं तिरते वि महीरिषो यो वो वराय दाशति|	that man increases home and strengthening ample food who brings you offerings as ye list.
नहि वश्चरमं चन वसिष्ठः परिमंसते|	vasiṣṭha will not overlook the lowliest one among you all.
अस्माकमद्य मरुतः सुते सचा विश्वे पिबत कामिनः|	o maruts of our soma juice effused today drink all of you with eager haste.
नहि व ऊतिः पर्तनासु मर्धति यस्मा अराध्वं नरः|	your succour in the battle injures not the man to whom ye heroes grant your gifts.
अभि व आवर्त सुमतिर्नवीयसी तूयं यात पिपीषवः|	may your most recent favour turn to us again come quickly ye who fain would drink.
ओ षु घर्ष्विराधसो यातनान्धांसि पीतये|	come hitherward to drink the juice o ye whose bounties give you joy.
इमा वो हव्या मरुतो ररे हि कं मो षवन्यत्र गन्तन|	these offerings are for you these maruts i present go not to any place but this.
आ च नो बर्हिः सदताविता च न सपार्हाणि दातवे वसु|	sit on our sacred grass be graciously inclined to give the wealth for which we long.
अस्रेधन्तो मरुतः सोम्ये मधौ सवाहेह मादयाध्वै|	to take delight ye maruts friends of all with svāhā in sweet soma juice.
सस्वश्चिद धि तन्वः शुम्भमाना आ हंसासो नीलप्र्ष्ठा अपप्तन|	decking the beauty of their forms in secret the swans with purple backs have flown down hither.
विश्वं शर्धो अभितो मा नि षेद नरो न रण्वाः सवने मदन्तः|	around me all the company hath settled like joyous heroes glad in our libation.
यो नो मरुतो अभि दुर्ह्र्णायुस्तिरश्चित्तानि वसवो जिघांसति|	maruts the man whose wrath is hard to master he who would slay us ere we think o vasus.
दरुहः पाशान परति स मुचीष्ट तपिष्ठेन हन्मनाहन्तना तम|	may he be tangled in the toils of mischief smite ye him down with your most flaming weapon.
सान्तपना इदं हविर्मरुतस्तज्जुजुष्टन|	o maruts ye consuming gods enjoy this offering brought for you.
युष्माकोतीरिशादसः|	to help us ye who slay the foe.
गर्हमेधास आ गत मरुतो माप भूतन|	sharers of household sacrifice come maruts stay not far away.
युष्माकोती सुदानवः|	that ye may help us bounteous ones.
इहेह वः सवतवसः कवयः सूर्यत्वचः|	here selfstrong maruts yea even here ye sages with your sunbright skins.
यज्ञं मरुत आव्र्णे|	i dedicate your sacrifice.
तर्यम्बकं यजामहे सुगन्धिं पुष्टिवर्धनम|	tryambaka we worship sweet augmenter of prosperity.
उर्वारुकमिवबन्धनान मर्त्योर्मुक्षीय माम्र्तात|	as from its stem the cucumber so may i be released from death not reft of immortality.
पर शुन्ध्युवं वरुणाय परेष्ठां मतिं वसिष्ठ मीळ्हुषे भरस्व|	present to varuṇa thine hymn vasiṣṭha bright most delightful to the bounteous giver.
य ईमर्वाञ्चं करते यजत्रं सहस्रामघं वर्षणं बर्हन्तम|	who bringeth on to us the bull the lofty the holy laden with a thousand treasures.
अधा नवस्य सन्द्र्शं जगन्वानग्नेरनीकं वरुणस्य मंसि|	and now as i am come before his presence i take the face of varuṇa for agnis.
सवर्यदश्मन्नधिपा उ अन्धोअभि मा वपुर्द्र्शये निनीयात|	so might he bringlord also of the darknessthe light in heaven that i may see its beauty.
आ यद रुहाव वरुणश्च नावं पर यत समुद्रमीरयावमध्यम|	when varuṇa and i embark together and urge our boat into the midst of ocean.
अधि यदपां सनुभिश्चराव पर परेङख ईङखयावहै शुभे कम|	we when we ride oer ridges of the waters will swing within that swing and there be happy.
वसिष्ठं ह वरुणो नाव्याधाद रषिं चकार सवपा महोभिः|	varuṇa placed vasiṣṭha in the vessel and deftly with his niight made him a Ṛṣi.
सतोतारं विप्रः सुदिनत्वे अह्नां यान नु दयावस्ततनन यादुषासः|	when days shone bright the sage made him a singer while the heavens broadened and the dawns were lengthened.
कव तयानि नौ सख्या बभूवुः सचावहे यदव्र्कं पुरा चित|	what hath become of those our ancient friendships when without enmity we walked together.
बर्हन्तं मानं वरुण सवधावः सहस्रद्वारं जगमा गर्हं ते|	i varuṇa thou glorious lord have entered thy lofty home thine house with thousand portals.
य आपिर्नित्यो वरुण परियः सन तवामागांसि कर्णवत सखा ते|	if he thy true ally hath sinned against thee still varuṇa he is the friend thou lovedst.
मा त एनस्वन्तो यक्षिन भुजेम यन्धि षमा विप्र सतुवते वरूथम|	let us not living one as sinners i know thee give shelter as a sage to him who lauds thee.
धरुवासु तवासु कषितिषु कषियन्तो वयस्मत पाशं वरुणोमुमोचत|	while we abide in these fixed habitations and from the lap of aditi win favour.
अवो वन्वाना अदितेरुपस्थाद यूयं पात|	may varuṇa untie the bond that binds us preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
उषो न जारः पर्थु पाजो अश्रेद दविद्युतद दीद्यच्छोशुचानः|	he hath sent forth bright radiant and refulgent like the dawns lover his farspreading lustre.
वर्षा हरिः शुचिरा भाति भासा धियो हिन्वान उशतीरजीगः|	pure in his splendour shines the golden hero our longing thoughts hath he aroused and wakened.
सवर्ण वस्तोरुषसामरोचि यज्ञं तन्वाना उशिजो न मन्म|	he like the sun hath shone while morn is breaking and priests who weave the sacrifice sing praises.
अग्निर्जन्मानि देव आ वि विद्वान दरवद दूतो देवयावा वनिष्ठः|	agni the god who knows their generations and visits gods most bounteous rapid envoy.
अछा गिरो मतयो देवयन्तीरग्निं यन्ति दरविणं भिक्षमाणाः|	our songs and holy hymns go forth to agni seeking the god and asking him for riches.
सुसन्द्र्शं सुप्रतीकं सवञ्चं हव्यवाहमरतिम्मानुषाणाम|	him fair to see of goodly aspect mighty mens messenger who carries their oblations.
इन्द्रं नो अग्ने वसुभिः सजोषा रुद्रं रुद्रेभिरा वहा बर्हन्तम|	joined with the vasus agni bring thou indra bring hither mighty rudra with the rudras.
आदित्येभिरदितिं विश्वजन्यां बर्हस्पतिं रक्वभिर्विश्ववारम|	aditi good to all men with Ādityas bṛhaspati allbounteous with the singers.
मन्द्रं होतारमुशिजो यविष्ठमग्निं विश ईळते अध्वरेषु|	men eagerly implore at sacrifices agni most youthful god the joyous herald.
स हि कषपावानभवद रयीणामतन्द्रो दूतो यजथाय देवान|	for he is lord and ruler over riches and for gods worship an unwearied envoy.
पर बरह्माणो अङगिरसो नक्षन्त पर करन्दनुर्नभन्यस्य वेतु|	let brahmans and aṅgirases come forward and let the roar of cloudy heaven surround us.
पर धेनव उदप्रुतो नवन्त युज्यातामद्री अध्वरस्य पेशः|	loud low the milchkine swimming in the waters set be the stones that grace our holy service.
सुगस्ते अग्ने सनवित्तो अध्वा युक्ष्वा सुते हरितो रोहितश्च|	fair agni is thy longknown path to travel yoke for the juice tfiy bay thy ruddy horses.
ये वा सद्मन्नरुषा वीरवाहो हुवे देवानां जनिमानिसत्तः|	or red steeds herobearing for the chamber seated i call the deities generations.
समु वो यज्ञं महयन नमोभिः पर होता मन्द्रो रिरिच उपाके|	they glorify your sacrifice with worship yet the glad priest near them is left unequalled.
यजस्व सु पुर्वणीक देवाना यज्ञियामरमतिं वव्र्त्याः|	bring the gods hither thou of many aspects turn hitherward aramati the holy.
यदा वीरस्य रेवतो दुरोणे सयोनशीरतिथिराचिकेतत|	what time the guest hath made himself apparent at ease reclining in the rich mans dwelling.
सुप्रीतो अग्निः सुधितो दम आ स विशे दाति वार्यमियत्यै|	agni wellpleased wellplaced within the chamber gives to a house like this wealth worth the choosing.
इमं नो अग्ने अध्वरं जुषस्व मरुत्स्विन्द्रे यशसं कर्धी नः|	accept this sacrifice of ours o agni glorify it with indra and the maruts.
आ नक्ता बर्हिः सदतामुषासोशन्ता मित्रावरुणायजेह|	here on our grass let night and dawn be seated bring longing varuṇa and mitra hither.
एवाग्निं सहस्यं वसिष्ठो रायस्कामो विश्वप्स्न्यस्य सतौत|	thus hath vasiṣṭha praised victorious agni yearning for wealth that giveth all subsistence.
इषं रयिं पप्रथद वाजमस्मे यूयं पात|	may he bestow on us food strength and riches preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
महानस्यध्वरस्य परकेतो न रते तवदम्र्ता मादयन्ते|	great art thou agni sacrifices herald not without thee are deathless gods made joyful.
आ विश्वेभिः सरथं याहि देवैर्न्यग्ने होता परथमः सदेह|	come hither with all deities about thee here take thy seat the first as priest o agni.
तवामीळते अजिरं दूत्याय हविष्मन्तः सदमिन मानुषासः|	men with oblations evermore entreat thee the swift to undertake an envoys duty.
यस्य देवैरासदो बर्हिरग्नेअहान्यस्मै सुदिना भवन्ति|	he on whose sacred grass with gods thou sittest to him o agni are the days propitious.
तरिश्चिदक्तोः पर चिकितुर्वसूनि तवे अन्तर्दाशुषे मर्त्याय|	three times a day in thee are shown the treasures sent for the mortal who presents oblation.
मनुष्वदग्न इह यक्षि देवान भवा नो दूतो अधिशस्तिपावा|	bring the gods hither like a man o agni be thou our envoy guarding us from curses.
अग्निरीशे बर्हतो अध्वरस्याग्निर्विश्वस्य हविषः कर्तस्य|	lord of the lofty sacrifice is agni agni is lord of every gift presented.
करतुं हयस्य वसवो जुषन्ताथा देवा दधिरे हव्यवाहम|	the vasus were contented with his wisdom so the gods made him their oblationbearer.
आग्ने वह हविरद्याय देवानिन्द्रज्येष्ठास इह मादयन्ताम|	o agni bring the gods to taste our presents with indra leading here let them be joyful.
इमं यज्ञं दिवि देवेषु धेहि यूयं पात|	convey this sacrifice to gods in heaven ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
अध्वर्यवो ऽरुणं दुग्धम अंशुं जुहोतन वर्षभाय कषितीनाम|	priests offer to the lord of all the people the milkedout stalk of soma radiantcoloured.
गौराद वेदीयां अवपानम इन्द्रो विश्वाहेद याति सुतसोमम इछन|	no wildbull knows his drinkingplace like indra who ever seeks him who hath pressed the soma.
यद दधिषे परदिवि चार्व अन्नं दिवेदिवे पीतिम इद अस्य वक्षि|	thou dost desire to drink each day that passes the pleasant food which thou hast had aforetime.
उत हर्दोत मनसा जुषाण उशन्न इन्द्र परस्थितान पाहि सोमान|	o indra gratified in heart and spirit drink eagerly the soma set before thee.
जज्ञानः सोमं सहसे पपाथ पर ते माता महिमानम उवाच|	thou newlyborn for strength didst drink the soma the mother told thee of thy future greatness.
एन्द्र पप्राथोर्व अन्तरिक्षं युधा देवेभ्यो वरिवश चकर्थ|	o indra thou hast filled midairs wide region and given the gods by battle room and freedom.
यद योधया महतो मन्यमानान साक्षाम तान बाहुभिः शाशदानान|	when thou hast urged the arrocrant to combat proud in their strength of arm we will subdue them.
यद वा नर्भिर वर्त इन्द्राभियुध्यास तं तवयाजिं सौश्रवसं जयेम|	or indra when thou fightest girt by heroes we in the glorious fray with thee will conquer.
परेन्द्रस्य वोचम परथमा कर्तानि पर नूतना मघवा या चकार|	i will declare the earliest deeds of indra and recent acts which maghavan hath accomplished.
यदेद अदेवीर असहिष्ट माया अथाभवत केवलः सोमो अस्य|	when he had conquered godless wiles and magic soma became his own entire possession.
तवेदं विश्वम अभितः पशव्यं यत पश्यसि चक्षसा सूर्यस्य|	thine is this world of flocks and herds around thee which with the eye of sūrya thou beholdest.
गवाम असि गोपतिर एक इन्द्र भक्षीमहि ते परयतस्य वस्वः|	thou indra art alone the lord of cattle may we enjoy the treasure which thou givest.
बर्हस्पते युवम इन्द्रश च वस्वो दिव्यस्येशाथे उत पार्थिवस्य|	ye twain are lords of wealth in earth and heaven thou o bṛhaspati and thou o indra.
धत्तं रयिं सतुवते कीरये चिद यूयम पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	mean though he be give wealth to him who lauds you preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
परातरग्निं परातरिन्द्रं हवामहे परातर्मित्रावरुणाप्रातरश्विना|	agni at dawn and indra we invoke at dawn and varuṇa and mitra and the aśvins twain.
परातर्भगं पूषणं बरह्मणस पतिं परातः सोममुत रुद्रं हुवेम|	bhaga at dawn pūṣan and brahmaṇaspati soma at dawn rudra we will invoke at dawn.
परातर्जितं भगमुग्रं हुवेम वयं पुत्रमदितेर्यो विधर्ता|	we will invoke strong earlyconquering bhaga the son of aditi the great supporter.
आध्रश्चिद यं मन्यमानस्तुरश्चिद राजा चिद यं भगं भक्षीत्याह|	thinking of whom the poor yea even the mighty even the king himself says give me bhaga.
भग परणेतर्भग सत्यराधो भगेमां धियमुदवा ददन नः|	bhaga our guide bhaga whose gifts are faithful favour this song and give us wealth o bhaga.
भग पर णो जनय गोभिरश्वैर्भग पर नर्भिर्न्र्वन्तः सयाम|	bhaga augment our store of kine and horses bhaga may we be rich in men and heroes.
उतेदानीं भगवन्तः सयामोत परपित्व उत मध्ये अह्नाम|	so may felicity be ours at present and when the day approaches and at noontide.
उतोदिता मघवन सूर्यस्य वयं देवानां सुमतौ सयाम|	and may we still o bounteous one at sunset be happy in the deities lovingkindness.
भग एव भगवानस्तु देवास्तेन वयं भगवन्तः सयाम|	may bhaga verily be blissbestower and through him gods may happiness attend us.
तं तवा भग सर्व इज्जोहवीति स नो भग पुरेता भवेह|	as such o bhaga all with might invoke thee as such be thou our champion here o bhaga.
समध्वरायोषसो नमन्त दधिक्रावेव शुचये पदाय|	to this our worship may all dawns incline them and come to the pure place like dadhikrāvan.
अर्वाचीनं वसुविदं भगं नो रथमिवाश्वा वाजिन आ वहन्तु|	as strong steeds draw a chariot may they bring us hitherward bhaga who discovers treasure.
अश्वावतीर्गोमतीर्न उषासो वीरवतीः सदमुछन्तु भद्राः|	may blessed mornings dawn on us for ever with wealth of kine of horses and of heroes.
घर्तं दुहाना विश्वतः परपीता यूयं पात|	streaming with all abundance pouring fatness preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
यज्ञे दिवो नर्षदने पर्थिव्या नरो यत्र देवयवो मदन्ति|	where heaven and earth combine in mens assembly and ttose who love the gods delight in worship.
इन्द्राय यत्र सवनानि सुन्वे गमन मदाय परथमं वयश च|	where the libations are effused for indra may he come first to drink and make him stronger.
आ दैव्या वर्णीमहे ऽवांसि बर्हस्पतिर नो मह आ सखायः|	we crave the heavenly grace of gods to guard usso may bṛhaspati o friends exalt us.
यथा भवेम मीळ्हुषे अनागा यो नो दाता परावतः पितेव|	that he the bounteous god may find us sintess who giveth from a distance like a father.
तम उ जयेष्ठं नमसा हविर्भिः सुशेवम बरह्मणस पतिं गर्णीषे|	that brahmaṇaspati most high and gracious i glorify with offerings and with homage.
इन्द्रं शलोको महि दैव्यः सिषक्तु यो बरह्मणो देवक्र्तस्य राजा|	may the great song of praise divine reach indra who is the king of prayer the gods creation.
स आ नो योनिं सदतु परेष्ठो बर्हस्पतिर विश्ववारो यो अस्ति|	may that bṛhaspati who brings all blessings most dearly loved be seated by our altar.
कामो रायः सुवीर्यस्य तं दात पर्षन नो अति सश्चतो अरिष्टान|	heroes and wealth we crave may he bestow them and bear us safe beyond the men who vex us.
तम आ नो अर्कम अम्र्ताय जुष्टम इमे धासुर अम्र्तासः पुराजाः|	to us these deathless ones erst born have granted this laud of ours which gives the immortal pleasure.
शुचिक्रन्दं यजतम पस्त्य्र्नाम बर्हस्पतिम अनर्वाणं हुवेम|	let us invoke bṛhaspati the foeless the clearvoiced god the holy one of households.
तं शग्मासो अरुषासो अश्वा बर्हस्पतिं सहवाहो वहन्ति|	him this bṛhaspati his redhued horses drawing together full of strength bring hither.
सहश चिद यस्य नीलवत सधस्थं नभो न रूपम अरुषं वसानाः|	robed in red colour like the cloud they carry the lord of might whose friendship gives a dwelling.
स हि शुचिः शतपत्रः स शुन्ध्युर हिरण्यवाशीर इषिरः सवर्षाः|	for he is pure with hundred wings refulgent with sword of gold impetuous winning sunlight.
बर्हस्पतिः स सवावेश रष्वः पुरू सखिभ्य आसुतिं करिष्ठः|	sublime bṛhaspati easy of access granteth his friends most bountiful refreshment.
देवी देवस्य रोदसी जनित्री बर्हस्पतिं वाव्र्धतुर महित्वा|	both heaven and earth divine the deitys parents have made bṛhaspati increase in grandeur.
दक्षाय्याय दक्षता सखायः करद बरह्मणे सुतरा सुगाधा|	glorify him o friends who merits glory may he give prayer fair way and easy passage.
इयं वाम बरह्मणस पते सुव्र्क्तिर बरह्मेन्द्राय वज्रिणे अकारि|	this brahmaṇaspati is your laudation prayer hath been made to thunderwielding indra.
अविष्टं धियो जिग्र्तम पुरंधीर जजस्तम अर्यो वनुषाम अरातीः|	favour our songs wake up our thought and spirit destroy the godless and our foemens malice.
बर्हस्पते युवम इन्द्रश च वस्वो दिव्यस्येशाथे उत पार्थिवस्य|	ye twain are lords of wealth in earth and heaven thou o bṛhaspati and thou o indra.
धत्तं रयिं सतुवते कीरये चिद यूयम पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	mean though he be give wealth to him who lauds you preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
वयुषा आवः पथ्या जनानां पञ्च कषितीर्मानुषीर्बोधयन्ती|	rousing the lands where mens five tribes are settled dawn hath disclosed the pathways of the people.
सुसन्द्र्ग्भिरुक्षभिर्भानुमश्रेद वि सूर्यो रोदसी चक्षसावः|	she hath sent out her sheen with beauteous oxen the sun with light hath opened earth and heaven.
वयञ्जते दिवो अन्तेष्वक्तून विशो न युक्ता उषसो यतन्ते|	they paint their bright rays on the skys far limits the dawns come on like tribes arrayed for battle.
सं ते गावस्तम आ वर्तयन्ति जयोतिर्यछन्ति सवितेव बाहू|	thy cattle closely shutting up the darkness as savitar spreads his arms give forth their lustre.
अभूदुषा इन्द्रतमा मघोन्यजीजनत सुविताय शरवांसि|	wealthy most like to indra dawn hath risen and brought forth lauds that shall promote our welfare.
वि दिवो देवी दुहिता दधात्यङगिरस्तमा सुक्र्ते वसूनि|	daughter of heaven a goddess she distributes best of aṅgirases treasures to the pious.
तावदुषो राधो अस्मभ्यं रास्व यावत सतोत्र्भ्यो अरदो गर्णाना|	bestow on us o dawn that ample bounty which thou didst send to those who sang thy praises.
यां तवा जज्ञुर्व्र्षभस्या रवेण वि दर्ळ्हस्य दुरो अद्रेरौर्णोः|	thou whom with bellowings of a bull they quickened thou didst unbar the firmset mountains portals.
देवंदेवं राधसे चोदयन्त्यस्मद्र्यक सून्र्ता ईरयन्ती|	impelling every god to grant his bounty sending to us the charm of pleasant voices.
वयुछन्ती नः सनये धियो धा यूयं पात|	vouchsafe us thoughts for profit as thou breakest preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
परति केतवः परथमा अद्र्श्रन्नूर्ध्वा अस्या अञ्जयो वि शरयन्ते|	we have beheld her earliest lights approaching her many glories part on high asunder.
उषो अर्वाचा बर्हता रथेन जयोतिष्मता वाममस्मभ्यं वक्षि|	on car sublime refulgent wending hither o uṣas bring the wealth that makes us happy.
परति षीमग्निर्जरते समिद्धः परति विप्रासो मतिभिर्ग्र्णन्तः|	the fire wellkindied sings aloud to greet her and with their hymns the priests are chaming welcome.
उषा याति जयोतिषा बाधमाना विश्वा तमांसि दुरिताप देवी|	uṣas approaches in her splendour driving all evil darkness far away the goddess.
एता उ तयाः परत्यद्र्श्रन पुरस्ताज्ज्योतिर्यछन्तीरुषसोविभातीः|	apparent eastward are those lights of morning sending out lustre as they rise around them.
अजीजनन सूर्यं यज्ञमग्निमपाचीनं तमो अगादजुष्टम|	she hath brought forth sun sacrifice and agni and far away hath fled detested darkness.
अचेति दिवो दुहिता मघोनी विश्वे पश्यन्त्युषसं विभातीम|	rich daughter of the sky we all behold her yea all men look on dawn as she is breaking.
आस्थाद रथं सवधया युज्यमानमा यमश्वासः सुयुजो वहन्ति|	fler car that moves selfharnessed hath she mounted the car drawn onward by her wellyoked horses.
परति तवाद्य सुमनसो बुधन्तास्माकासो मघवानो वयं च|	inspired with loving thoughts this day to greet thee we and our wealthy nobles have awakened.
तिल्विलायध्वमुषसो विभातीर्यूयं पात|	show yourselves fruitful dawns as ye are rising preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
इमा उ वां दिविष्टय उस्रा हवन्ते अश्विना|	these morning sacrifices call you aśvins at the break of day.
अयं वामह्वेअवसे शचीवसू विशंविशं हि गछथः|	for help have i invoked you rich in power and might for house by house ye visit all.
युवं चित्रं ददथुर्भोजनं नरा चोदेथां सून्र्तावते|	o heroes ye bestow wonderful nourishment send it to him whose songs are sweet.
अर्वाग रथं समनसा नि यछतं पिबतं सोम्यं मधु|	accordant both of you drive your car down to us and drink the savoury soma juice.
आ यातमुप भूषतं मध्वः पिबतमश्विना|	approach ye and be near to us drink o ye aśvins of the meath.
दुग्धं पयोव्र्षणा जेन्यावसू मा नो मर्धिष्टमा गतम|	draw forth the milk ye mighty rich in genuine wealth injure us not and come to us.
अश्वासो ये वामुप दाशुषो गर्हं युवां दीयन्ति बिभ्रतः|	the horses that convey you in their rapid flight down to the worshippers abode.
मक्षूयुभिर्नरा हयेभिरश्विना देवा यातमस्मयू|	with these your speedy coursers heroes aśvins come ye gods come wellinclined to us.
अधा ह यन्तो अश्विना पर्क्षः सचन्त सूरयः|	yea verily our princes seek the aśvins in pursuit of food.
ता यंसतो मघवद्भ्यो धरुवं यशश्छर्दिरस्मभ्यं नासत्या|	these shall give lasting glory to our liberal lords and both nāsatyas shelter us.
पर ये ययुरव्र्कासो रथा इव नर्पातारो जनानाम|	those who have led the way like cars offending none those who are guardians of the men.
उत सवेन शवसा शूशुवुर्नर उत कषियन्ति सुक्षितिम|	also through their own might the heroes have grown strong and dwell in safe and happy homes.
आदित्यासो अदितयः सयाम पूर्देवत्रा वसवो मर्त्यत्रा|	may we be free from every bond Ādityas a castle among gods and men ye vasus.
सनेम मित्रावरुणा सनन्तो भवेम दयावाप्र्थिवी भवन्तः|	winning may we win varuṇa and mitra and being may we be o earth and heaven.
मित्रस्तन नो वरुणो मामहन्त शर्म तोकाय तनयाय गोपाः|	may varuṇa and mitra grant this blessing our guardians shelter to our seed and offspring.
मा वो भुजेमान्यजातमेनो मा तत कर्म वसवो यच्चयध्वे|	let us not suffer for anothers trespass nor do the thing that ye o vasus punish.
तुरण्यवोअङगिरसो नक्षन्त रत्नं देवस्य सवितुरियानाः|	the everprompt aṅgirases imploring riches from savitar the god obtained them.
पिता च तन नो महान यजत्रो विश्वे देवाः समनसो जुषन्त|	so may our father who is great and holy and all the gods accordant grant this favour.
पर मित्रयोर्वरुणयोः सतोमो न एतु शूष्यः|	let our strong hymn of praise go forth the laud of mitravaruṇa.
नमस्वान तुविजातयोः|	with homage to that highborn pair.
या धारयन्त देवाः सुदक्षा दक्षपितरा|	the two exceeding wise the sons of dakṣa whom the gods ordained.
असुर्याय परमहसा|	for lordship excellently great.
ता न सतिपा तनूपा वरुण जरितॄणाम|	such guardians of our homes and us o mitravaruṇa fulfil.
मित्र साधयतं धियः|	the thoughts of those who sing your praise.
यदद्य सूर उदितेअनागा मित्रो अर्यमा|	so when the sun hath risen today may sinless mitra aryaman.
सुवाति सविताभगः|	bhaga and savitar sendus forth.
सुप्रावीरस्तु स कषयः पर नु यामन सुदानवः|	may this our home be guarded well forward ye bounteous on the way.
ये नो अंहोअतिपिप्रति|	who bear us safely oer distress.
उत सवराजो अदितिरदब्धस्य वरतस्य ये|	and those selfreigning aditi whose statute is inviolate.
महो राजान ईशते|	the kings who rule a vast domain.
परति वां सूर उदिते मित्रं गर्णीषे वरुणम|	soon as the sun hath risen to you to mitravaruṇa i sing.
अर्यमणंरिशादसम|	and aryarnan who slays the foe.
राया हिरण्यया मतिरियमव्र्काय शवसे|	with wealth of gold may this my song bring unmolested power and might.
इयं विप्रामेधसातये|	and brahmans gain the sacrifice.
ते सयाम देव वरुण ते मित्र सूरिभिः सह|	may we be thine god varuṇa and with our princes mitra thine.
इषं सवश्च धीमहि|	food and heavens light will we obtain.
बहवः सूरचक्षसोअग्निजिह्वा रताव्र्धः|	many are they who strengthen law suneyed with agni for their tongue.
तरीणि ये येमुर्विदथानि धीतिभिर्विश्वानि परिभूतिभिः|	they who direct the three great gatherings with their thoughts yea all things with surpassing might.
वि ये दधुः शरदं मासमादहर्यज्ञमक्तुं चाद रचम|	they who have stablished year and month and then the day night sacrifice and holy verse.
अनाप्यं वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा कषत्रं राजान आशत|	varuṇa mitra aryarnan the kings have won dominion which none else may gain.
तद वो अद्य मनामहे सूक्तैः सूर उदिते|	so at the rising of the sun we think of you with hymns today.
यदोहते वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा यूयं रतस्य रथ्यः|	even as varuṇa mitra aryaman deserve ye are the charioteers of law.
रतावान रतजाता रताव्र्धो घोरासो अन्र्तद्विषः|	true to law born in law the strengtheners of law terrible haters of the false.
तेषांवः सुम्ने सुछर्दिष्टमे नरः सयाम ये च सूरयः|	in their felicity which gives the best defence may we men and our princes dwell.
उदु तयद दर्शतं वपुर्दिव एति परतिह्वरे|	uprises on the slope of heaven that marvel that attracts die sight.
यदीमाशुर्वहति देव एतशो विश्वस्मै चक्षसे अरम|	as swift celestial etaśa bears it away prepared for every eye to see.
शीर्ष्णःशीर्ष्णो जगतस्तस्थुषस पतिं समया विश्वमा रजः|	lord of each single head of fixt and moving things equally through the whole expanse.
सप्त सवसारः सुविताय सूर्यं वहन्ति हरितो रथे|	the seven sister bays bear sūrya on his car to bring us wealth and happiness.
तच्चक्षुर्देवहितं शुक्रमुच्चरत|	a hundred autumns may we see that bright eye godordained arise.
पश्येम शरदः शतं जीवेम शरदः शतम|	a hundred autumns may we live.
काव्येभिरदाभ्या यातं वरुण दयुमत|	infallible through your wisdom come hither resplendent varuṇa.
मित्रश्च सोमपीतये|	and mitra to the soma draught.
दिवो धामभिर्वरुण मित्रश्चा यातमद्रुहा|	come as the laws of heaven ordain varuṇa mitra void of guile.
पिबतं सोममातुजी|	press near and drink the soma juice.
आ यातं मित्रावरुणा जुषाणावाहुतिं नरा|	come mitra varuṇa accept heroes our sacrificial gift.
पातं सोमं रताव्र्धा|	drink soma ye who strengthen law.
मो षु वरुण मर्न्मयं गर्हं राजन्नहं गमम|	let me not yet king varuṇa enter into the house of clay.
मर्ळा सुक्षत्र मर्ळय|	have mercy spare me mighty lord.
यदेमि परस्फुरन्निव दर्तिर्न धमातो अद्रिवः|	when thunderer i move along tremulous like a windblown skin.
मर्ळा स म|	have mercy spare me mighty lord.
करत्वः समह दीनता परतीपं जगमा शुचे|	o bright and powerful god through want of strength i erred and went astray.
मर्ळा स म|	have mercy spare me mighty lord.
अपां मध्ये तस्थिवांसं तर्ष्णाविदज्जरितारम|	thirst found thy worshipper though he stood in the midst of waterfijods.
मर्ळा स म|	have mercy spare me mighty lord.
यत किं चेदं वरुण दैव्ये जनेअभिद्रोहं मनुष्याश्चरामसि|	o varuṇa whatever the offence may be which we as men commit against the heavenly host.
अचित्ती यत तव धर्मा युयोपिम मा नस्तस्मादेनसो देव रीरिषः|	when through our want of thought we violate thy laws punish us not o god for that iniquity.
आ देवो यातु सविता सुरत्नोअन्तरिक्षप्रा वहमानो अश्वैः|	may the god savitar rich in goodly treasures filling the region borne by steeds come hither.
हस्ते दधानो नर्या पुरूणि निवेशयञ्च परसुवञ्च भूम|	in his hand holding much that makes men happy lulling to slumber and arousing creatures.
उदस्य बाहू शिथिरा बर्हन्ता हिरण्यया दिवो अन्ताननष्टाम|	golden sublime and easy in their motion his arms extend unto the bounds of heaven.
नूनं सो अस्य महिमा पनिष्ट सूरश्चिदस्मा अनु दादपस्याम|	now shall that mightiness of his he lauded even sūrya yields to him in active vigour.
स घा नो देवः सविता सहावा साविषद वसुपतिर्वसूनि|	may this god savitar the strong and mighty the lord of precious wealth vouchsafe us treasures.
विश्रयमाणो अमतिमुरूचीं मर्तभोजनमध रासते नः|	may he advancing his farspreading lustre bestow on us the food that feedeth mortals.
इमा गिरः सवितारं सुजिह्वं पूर्णगभस्तिमीळते सुपाणिम|	these songs praise savitar whose tongue is pleasant praise him whose arms are full whose hands are lovely.
चित्रं वयो बर्हदस्मे दधातु यूयं पात|	high vital strength and manifold may he grant us preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
पर वीरया शुचयो दद्रिरे वामध्वर्युभिर्मधुमन्तः सुतासः|	to you pure juice rich in meath are offered by priest through longing for the pair of heroes.
वह वायो नियुतो याह्यछा पिबा सुतस्यान्धसो मदाय|	drive vāyu bring thine harnessed horses hither drink the pressed soma till it make thee joyful.
ईशानाय परहुतिं यस्त आनट छुचिं सोमं शुचिपास्तुभ्यं वायो|	whoso to thee the mighty brings oblation pure soma unto thee puredrinking vāyu.
कर्णोषि तं मर्त्येषु परशस्तं जातोजातो जायते वाज्यस्य|	that man thou makest famous among mortals to him strong sons are born in quick succession.
राये नु यं जज्ञतू रोदसीमे राये देवी धिषणा धाति देवम|	the god whom both these worlds brought forth for riches whom heavenly dhiṣaṇā for our wealth appointeth.
अध वायुं नियुतः सश्चत सवा उत शवेतं वसुधितिं निरेके|	his team of harnessed horses waits on vāyu and foremost on the radiant treasurebearer.
उछन्नुषसः सुदिना अरिप्रा उरु जयोतिर्विविदुर्दीध्यानाः|	the spotless dawns with fair bright days have broken they found the spacious light when they were shining.
गव्यं चिदूर्वमुशिजो वि वव्रुस्तेषामनु परदिवः सस्रुरापः|	eagerly they disclosed the stall of cattle floods streamed for them as in the days aforetime.
ते सत्येन मनसा दीध्यानाः सवेन युक्तासः करतुना वहन्ति|	these with their truthful spirit shining brightly move on provided with their natural insight.
इन्द्रवायू वीरवाहं रथं वामीशानयोरभि पर्क्षः सचन्ते|	viands attend the car that beareth heroes your car ye sovran pair indra and vāyu.
ईशानासो ये दधते सवर्णो गोभिरश्वेभिर्वसुभिर्हिरण्यैः|	may these who give us heavenly light these rulers with gifts of kine and horses gold and treasures.
इन्द्रवायू सूरयो विश्वमायुरर्वद्भिर्वीरैः पर्तनासु सह्युः|	these princes through full life indra and vāyu oercome in battle with their steeds and heroes.
अर्वन्तो न शरवसो भिक्षमाणा इन्द्रवायू सुष्टुतिभिर्वसिष्ठाः|	like coursers seeking fame will we vasisthas o indravāyu with our fair laudations.
वाजयन्तः सववसे हुवेम यूयं पात|	exerting all our power call you to aid us preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
बर्हदु गायिषे वचोअसुर्या नदीनाम|	i sing a lofty song for she is mightiest most divine of streams.
सरस्वतीमिन महयासुव्र्क्तिभिः सतोमैर्वसिष्ठ रोदसी|	sarasvatī will i exalt with hymns and lauds and o vasiṣṭha heaven and earth.
उभे यत ते महिना शुभ्रे अन्धसी अधिक्षियन्ति पूरवः|	when in the fulness of their strength the pūrus dwell beauteous one on thy two grassy banks.
सा नो बोध्यवित्री मरुत्सखा चोद राधो मघोनाम|	favour us thou who hast the maruts for thy friends stir up the bounty of our chiefs.
भद्रमिद भद्रा कर्णवत सरस्वत्यकवारी चेतति वाजिनीवती|	so may sarasvatī auspicious send good luck she rich in spoil is never niggardly in thought.
गर्णाना जमदग्निवत सतुवाना च वसिष्ठवत|	when praised in jamadagnis way and lauded as vasiṣṭha lauds.
जनीयन्तो नवग्रवः पुत्रीयन्तः सुदानवः|	we call upon sarasvān as unmarried men who long for wives.
सरस्वन्तं हवामहे|	as liberal men who yearn for sons.
ये ते सरस्व ऊर्मयो मधुमन्तो घर्तश्चुतः|	be thou our kind protector o sarasvān with those waves of thine.
तेभिर्नोअविता भव|	laden with sweets and dropping oil.
पीपिवांसं सरस्वत सतनं यो विश्वदर्षतः|	may we enjoy sarasvāns breast allbeautiful that swells with streams.
भक्षीमहि परजामिषम|	may we gain food and progeny.
धीरा तवस्य महिना जनूंषि वि यस्तस्तम्भ रोदसी चिदुर्वी|	wise verily are creatures through his greatness who stayed ever spacious heaven and earth asunder.
पर नाकं रष्वं नुनुदे बर्हन्तं दविता नक्षत्रम्पप्रथच्च भूम|	who urged the high and mighty sky to motion the star of old and spread the earth before him.
उत सवया तन्वा सं वदे तत कदा नवन्तर्वरुणे भुवानि|	with mine own heart i commune on the question how varuṇa and i may be united.
किं मे हव्यमह्र्णानो जुषेत कदा मर्ळीकं सुमना अभि खयम|	what gift of mine will he accept unangered when may i calmly look and find him gracious.
पर्छे तदेनो वरुण दिद्र्क्षूपो एमि चिकितुषो विप्र्छम|	fain to know this is my sin i question others i seek the wise o varuṇa and ask them.
समानमिन मे कवयश्चिदाहुरयं ह तुभ्यं वरुणो हर्णीते|	this one same answer even the sages gave me surely this varuṇa is angry with thee.
किमाग आस वरुण जयेष्ठं यत सतोतारं जिघांससि सखायम|	what varuṇa hath been my chief transgression that thou wouldst slay the friend who sings thy praises.
पर तन मे वोचो दूळभ सवधावोअव तवानेना नमसा तुर इयाम|	tell me unconquerable lord and quickly sinless will i approach thee with mine homage.
अव दरुग्धानि पित्र्या सर्जा नोअव या वयं चक्र्मा तनूभिः|	free us from sins committed by our fathers from those wherein we have ourselves offended.
अव राजन पशुत्र्पं न तायुं सर्जा वत्सं न दाम्नो वसिष्ठम|	o king loose like a thief who feeds the cattle as from the cord a calf set free vasiṣṭha.
न स सवो दक्षो वरुण धरुतिः सा सुरा मन्युर्विभीदकोचित्तिः|	not our own will betrayed us but seduction thoughtlessness varuṇa wine dice or anger.
अस्ति जयायान कनीयस उपारे सवप्नश्चनेदन्र्तस्य परयोता|	the old is near to lead astray the younger even sleep removeth not all evildoing.
अरं दासो न मीळ्हुषे कराण्यहं देवाय भूर्णयेअनागाः|	slavelike may i do service to the bounteous serve free from sin the god inclined to anger.
अचेतयदचितो देवो अर्यो गर्त्सं राये कवितरो जुनाति|	this gentle lord gives wisdom to the simple the wiser god leads on the wise to riches.
अयं सु तुभ्यं वरुण सवधावो हर्दि सतोम उपश्रितश्चिदस्तु|	o lord o varuṇa may this laudation come close to thee and lie within thy spirit.
शं नः कषेमे शमु योगे नो अस्तु यूयं पात|	may it be well with us in rest and labour preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
पिबा सोममिन्द्र मन्दतु तवा यं ते सुषाव हर्यश्वाद्रिः|	drink soma lord of bays and let it cheer thee indra the stone like a well guided courser.
सोतुर्बाहुभ्यां सुयतो नार्वा|	directed by the pressers arms hath pressed it.
यस्ते मदो युज्यश्चारुरस्ति येन वर्त्राणि हर्यश्व हंसि|	so let the draught of joy thy dear companion by which o lord of bays thou slayest foemen.
स तवामिन्द्र परभूवसो ममत्तु|	delight thee indra lord of princely treasures.
बोधा सु मे मघवन वाचमेमां यां ते वसिष्ठो अर्चतिप्रशस्तिम|	mark closely maghavan the words i utter this eulogy recited by vasiṣṭha.
इमा बरह्म सधमादे जुषस्व|	accept the prayers i offer at thy banquet.
शरुधी हवं विपिपानस्याद्रेर्बोधा विप्रस्यार्चतो मनीषाम|	hear thou the call of the juicedrinking pressstone hear thou the brahmans hymn who sings and lauds thee.
कर्ष्वा दुवांस्यन्तमा सचेमा|	take to thine inmost self these adorations.
न ते गिरो अपि मर्ष्ये तुरस्य न सुष्टुतिमसुर्यस्य विद्वान|	i know and neer forget the hymns and praises of thee the conqueror and thy strength immortal.
सदा ते नाम सवयशो विवक्मि|	thy name i ever utter selfrefulgent.
भूरि हि ते सवना मानुषेषु भूरि मनीषी हवते तवामित|	among mankind many are thy libations and many a time the pious sageinvokes thee.
मारे अस्मन मघवञ जयोक कः|	o maghavan be not long distant from us.
तुभ्येदिमा सवना शूर विश्वा तुभ्यं बरह्माणि वर्धना कर्णोमि|	all these libations are for thee o hero to thee i offer these my prayers that strengthen.
तवं नर्भिर्हव्यो विश्वधासि|	ever in every place must men invoke thee.
नू चिन नु ते मन्यमानस्य दस्मोदश्नुवन्ति महिमानमुग्र|	never do men attain o wonderworker thy greatness mighty one who must be lauded.
न वीर्यमिन्द्र ते न राधः|	nor indra thine heroic power and bounty.
ये च पूर्व रषयो ये च नूत्ना इन्द्र बरह्माणि जनयन्त विप्राः|	among all Ṛṣis indra old and recent who have engendered hymns as sacred singers.
अस्मे ते सन्तु सख्या शिवानि यूयं पात|	even with us be thine auspicious friendships ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
दधिक्रां वः परथममश्विनोषसमग्निं समिद्धं भगमूतये हुवे|	i call on dadhikrās the first to give you aid the aśvins bhaga dawn and agni kindled well.
इन्द्रं विष्णुं पूषणं बरह्मणस पतिमादित्यान दयावाप्र्थिवी अपः सवः|	indra and viṣṇu pūṣan brahmaṇaspati Ādityas heaven and earth the waters and the light.
दधिक्रामु नमसा बोधयन्त उदीराणा यज्ञमुपप्रयन्तः|	when rising to the sacrifice we hasten awaking dadhikrās with adorations.
इळां देवीं बर्हिषि सादयन्तोअश्विना विप्रा सुहवाहुवेम|	seating on sacred grass the goddess iḷā let us invoke the sage swifthearing aśvins.
दधिक्रावाणं बुबुधानो अग्निमुप बरुव उषसं सूर्यं गाम|	while i am thus arousing dadhikrāvan i speak to agni earth and dawn and sūrya.
बरध्नं मांश्चतोर्वरुणस्य बभ्रुं ते विश्वास्मद दुरिता यावयन्तु|	the red the brown of varuṇa ever mindful may they ward off from us all grief and trouble.
दधिक्रावा परथमो वाज्यर्वाग्रे रथानां भवति परजानन|	foremost is dadhikrāvan vigorous courser in forefront of the cars his way he knoweth.
संविदान उषसा सूर्येणादित्येभिर्वसुभिरङगिरोभिः|	closely allied with sūrya and with morning Ādityas and aṅgirases and vasus.
आ नो दधिक्राः पथ्यामनक्त्व रतस्य पन्थामन्वेतवा उ|	may dadhikrās prepare the way we travel that we may pass along the path of order.
शर्णोतु नो दैव्यं शर्धो अग्निः शर्ण्वन्तु विश्वे महिषामूराः|	may agni bear us and the heavenly army hear us all mighty ones whom none deceiveth.
इमा रुद्राय सथिरधन्वने गिरः कषिप्रेषवे देवाय सवधाव्ने|	to rudra bring these songs whose bow is firm and strong the selfdependent god with swiftlyflying shafts.
अषाळ्हाय सहमानाय वेधसे तिग्मायुधाय भरता शर्णोतु नः|	the wise the conqueror whom none may overcome armed with sharppointed weapons may he hear our call.
स हि कषयेण कषम्यस्य जन्मनः साम्राज्येन दिव्यस्य चेतति|	he through his lordship thinks on beings of the earth on heavenly beings through his high imperial sway.
अवन्नवन्तीरुप नो दुरश्चरानमीवो रुद्र जासु नो भव|	come willingly to our doors that gladly welcome thee and heal all sickness rudra in our families.
या ते दिद्युदवस्र्ष्टा दिवस परि कष्मया चरति परि साव्र्णक्तु नः|	may thy bright arrow which shot down by thee from heaven flieth upon the earth pass us uninjured by.
सहस्रं ते सवपिवात भेषजा मा नस्तोकेषुतनयेषु रीरिषह|	thou very gracious god hast thousand medicines inflict no evil on our sons or progeny.
मा नो वधी रुद्र मा परा दा मा ते भूम परसितौ हीळितस्य|	slay us not nor abandon us o rudra let not thy noose when thou art angry seize us.
आ नो भज बर्हिषि जीवशंसे यूयं पात|	give us trimmed grass and fame among the living preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
पर बरह्मैतु सदनाद रतस्य वि रश्मिभिः सस्र्जे सूर्यो गाः|	let the prayer issue from the seat of order for sūrya with his beams hath loosed the cattle.
वि सानुना पर्थिवी सस्र उर्वी पर्थु परतीकमध्येधे अग्निः|	with lofty ridges earth is far extended and agnis flame hath lit the spacious surface.
इमां वां मित्रावरुणा सुव्र्क्तिमिषं न कर्ण्वे असुरा नवीयः|	o asuras o varuṇa and mitra this hymn to you like food anew i offer.
इनो वामन्यः पदवीरदब्धो जनं च मित्रो यतति बरुवाणः|	one of you is a strong unerring leader and mitra speaking stirreth men to labour.
आ वातस्य धरजतो रन्त इत्या अपीपयन्त धेनवो न सूदाः|	the movements of the gliding wind come hither like cows the springs are filled to overflowing.
महो दिवः सदने जायमानोअचिक्रदद वर्षभः सस्मिन्नूधन|	born in the station een of lofty heaven the bull hath loudly bellowed in this region.
गिरा य एता युनजद धरी त इन्द्र परिया सुरथा शूर धायू|	may i bring hither with my song o indra wise aryaman who yokes thy dear bay horses.
पर यो मन्युं रिरिक्षतो मिनात्या सुक्रतुमर्यमणं वव्र्त्याम|	voracious with thy noble car o hero him who defeats the wrath of the malicious.
यजन्ते अस्य सख्यं वयश्च नमस्विनः सव रतस्य धामन|	in their own place of sacrifice adorers worship to gain long life and win his friendship.
वि पर्क्षो बाबधे नर्भि सतवान इदं नमो रुद्राय परेष्ठम|	he hath poured food on men when they have praised him be this the dearest reverence paid to rudra.
आ यत साकं यशसो वावशानाः सरस्वती सप्तथी सिन्धुमाता|	coming together glorious loudly roaring  sarasvatī mother of floods the seventh.
याः सुष्वयन्त सुदुघाः सुधारा अभि सवेन पयसा पीप्यानाः|	with copious milk with fair streams strongly flowing full swelling with the volume of their water.
उत तये नो मरुतो मन्दसाना धियं तोकं च वाजिनोअवन्तु|	and may the mighty maruts too rejoicing aid our devotion and protect our offspring.
मा नः परि खयदक्षरा चरन्त्यवीव्र्धन युज्यं ते रयिं नः|	let not swiftmoving aksara neglect us they have increased our own appropriate riches.
पर वो महीमरमतिं कर्णुध्वं पर पूषणं विदथ्यं न वीरम|	bring ye the great aramati before you and pūṣan as the hero of the synod.
भगं धियोअवितारं नो अस्याः सातौ वाजं रातिषाचं पुरन्धिम|	bhaga who looks upon this hymn with favour and as our strength the bountiful purandbi.
अछायं वो मरुतः शलोक एत्वछा विष्णुं निषिक्तपामवोभिः|	may this our song of praise reach you o maruts and viṣṇu guardian of the future infant.
उत परजायै गर्णते वयो धुर्यूयं पात|	may they vouchsafe the singer strength for offspring preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
पराग्नये विश्वशुचे धियन्धेअसुरघ्ने मन्म धीतिं भरध्वम|	bring song and hymn to agni asuraslayer enlightener of all and thoughtbestower.
भरे हविर्न बर्हिषि परीणानो वैश्वानराय यतये मतीनाम|	like an oblation on the grass to please him i bring this to vaiśvānara hymninspirer.
तवमग्ने शोचिषा शोशुचान आ रोदसी अप्र्णा जायमानः|	thou with thy flame o agni brightly glowing hast at thy birth filled full the earth and heaven.
तवं देवानभिशस्तेरमुञ्चो वैस्वानर जातवेदो महित्वा|	tiou with thy might vaiśvānara jātavedas settest the gods free frodi the curse that bound them.
जातो यदग्ने भुवना वयख्यः पशून न गोपा इर्यः परिज्मा|	agni when born thou lookedst on all creatures like a brisk herdsman moving round his cattle.
वैश्वानर बरह्मणे विन्द गातुं यूयं पात|	the path to prayer vaiśvānara thou foundest ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
पर शुक्रैतु देवी मनीषा अस्मत सुतष्टो रथो न वाजी|	may our divine and brilliant hymn go forth like a swift chariot wrought and fashioned well.
विदुः पर्थिव्या दिवो जनित्रं शर्ण्वन्त्यापो अध कषरन्तीः|	the waters listen as they flow along they know the origin of heaven and earth.
आपश्चिदस्मै पिन्वन्त पर्थ्वीर्व्र्त्रेषु शूरा मंसन्त उग्राः|	yea the broad waters swell their flood ior him of him strong heroes think amid their foes.
आ धूर्ष्वस्मै दधाताश्वानिन्द्रो न वज्री हिरण्यबाहुः|	set ye for him the coursers to the pole like indra thunderer is the goldenarmed.
अभि पर सथाताहेव यज्ञं यातेव पत्मन तमना हिनोत|	arouse you like the days to sacrifice speed gladly like a traveller on the way.
तमना समत्सु हिनोत यज्ञं दधात केतुं जनाय वीरम|	go swift to battles to the sacrifice set up a flag a hero for the folk.
उदस्य शुष्माद भानुर्नार्त बिभर्ति भारं पर्थिवी नभूम|	up from his strength hath risen as twere a light it bears the load as earth bears living things.
हवयामि देवानयातुरग्ने साधन्न्र्तेन धियं दधामि|	agni no demon i invoke the gods by law completing it i form a hymn.
अभि वो देवीं धियं दधिध्वं पर वो देवत्रा वाचं कर्णुध्वम|	closely albout you lay your heavenly song and send your voice to where the gods abide.
आ चष्ट आसां पाथो नदीनां वरुण उग्रः सहस्रचक्षाः|	varuṇa mighty with a thousand eyes beholds the paths wherein these rivers run.
राजा राष्ट्रानां पेशो नदीनामनुत्तमस्मै कषत्रं विश्वायु|	he king of kings the glory of the floods oer all that liveth hath resistless sway.
अविष्टो अस्मान विश्वासु विक्ष्वद्युं कर्णोत शंसं निनित्सोः|	may he assist us among all the tribes and make the enviers praise devoid of light.
वयेतु दिद्युद दविषामशेवा युयोत विष्वग रपस्तनूनाम|	may the foes threatening arrow pass us by may he put far from us our bodies sin.
अवीन नो अग्निर्हव्यान नमोभिः परेष्ठो अस्मा अधायि सतोमः|	agni oblationcater through our prayers aid us to him our dearest laud is brought.
सजूर्देवेभिरपां नपातं सखायं कर्ध्वं शिवो नो अस्तु|	accordant with the gods choose for our friend the waters child may he be good to us.
अब्जामुक्थैरहिं गर्णीषे बुध्ने नदीनां रजस्सु षीदन|	with lauds i sing the dragon born of floods he sits beneath the streams in middle air.
मा नोअहिर्बुध्न्यो रिषे धान मा यज्ञो अस्य सरिधद रतायोः|	neer may the dragon of the deep harm us neer fail this faithful servants sacrifice.
उत न एषु नर्षु शरवो धुः पर राये यन्तु शर्धन्तो अर्यः|	to these our heroes may they grant renown may pious men march boldly on to wealth.
तपन्ति शत्रुं सवर्ण भूमा महासेनासो अमेभिरेषाम|	leading great hosts with fierce attacks of these they burn their foes as the sun burns the earth.
आ यन नः पत्नीर्गमन्त्यछा तवष्टा सुपाणिर्दधातुवीरान|	what time our wives draw near to us may he lefthanded tvaṣṭar give us hero sons.
परति न सतोमं तवष्टा जुषेत सयादस्मे अरमतिर्वसूयुः|	may tvaṣṭar find our hymn acceptable and may aramati seeking wealth be ours.
ता नो रासन रातिषाचो वसून्या रोदसी वरुणानी शर्णोतु|	may they who lavish gifts bestow those treasures may rodasī and varuṇānī listen.
वरूत्रीभिः सुशरणो नो अस्तु तवष्टा सुदत्रो वि दधातु रायः|	may he with the varūtrīs be our refuge may bountiful tvaṣṭar give us store of riches.
तन नो रायः पर्वतास्तन न आपस्तद रातिषाच ओषधीरुत दयौः|	so may rich mountains and the liberal waters so may all herbs that grow on ground and heaven.
वनस्पतिभिः पर्थिवी सजोषा उभे रोदसी परि पासतो नः|	and earth accordant with the forestsovrans and both the worldhalves round about protect us.
अनु तदुर्वी रोदसी जिहातामनु दयुक्षो वरुण इन्द्रसखा|	to this may both the wide worlds lend approval and varuṇa in heaven whose friend is indra.
अनु विश्वे मरुतो ये सहासो रायः सयाम धरुणं धियध्यै|	may all the maruts give consent the victors that we may hold great wealth in firm possession.
तन न इन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निराप ओषधीर्वनिनो जुषन्त|	may indra varuṇa mitra and agni waters herbs trees accept the praise we offer.
शर्मन सयाम मरुतामुपस्थे यूयं पात|	may we find refuge in the maruts bosom protect us evermore ye gods with blessings.
समुद्रज्येष्ठाः सलिलस्य मध्यात पुनाना यन्त्यनिविशमानाः|	forth from the middle of the flood the waterstheir chief the seaflow cleansing never sleeping.
इन्द्रो या वज्री वर्षभो रराद ता आपो देवीरिहमामवन्तु|	indra the bull the thunderer dug their channels here let those waters goddesses protect me.
या आपो दिव्या उत वा सरवन्ति खनित्रिमा उत वा याः सवयंजाः|	waters which come from heaven or those that wander dug from the earth or flowing free by nature.
समुद्रार्था याः शुचयः पावकास्ता आपो|	bright purifying speeding to the ocean here let those waters goddesses protect me.
यासां राजा वरुणो याति मध्ये सत्यान्र्ते अवपश्यञ जनानाम|	those amid whom goes varuṇa the sovran he who discriminates mens truth and falsehood.
मधुश्चुतः शुचयो याः पावकास्ता आपो|	distilling meath the bright the purifying here let those waters goddesses protect me.
यासु राजा वरुणो यासु सोमो विश्वे देवा यासूर्जं मदन्ति|	they from whom varuṇa the king and soma and all the deities drink strength and vigour.
वैश्वानरो यास्वग्निः परविष्टस्ता आपो|	they into whom vaiśvānara agni entered here let those waters goddesses protect me.
ऊर्ध्वो अग्निः सुमतिं वस्वो अश्रेत परतीची जूर्णिर्देवतातिमेति|	agni erect hath shown enriching favour the flame goes forward to the gods assembly.
भेजाते अद्री रथ्येव पन्थां रतं होता न इषितो यजाति|	like carborne men the stones their path have chosen let the priest quickened celebrate our worship.
पर वाव्र्जे सुप्रया बर्हिरेषामा विश्पतीव बीरिट इयाते|	soft to the tread their sacred grass is scattered these go like kings amid the band around them.
विशामक्तोरुषसः पूर्वहूतौ वायुः पूषा सवस्तये नियुत्वान|	at the folks early call on night and morningvāyu and pūṣan with his team to bless us.
जमया अत्र वसवो रन्त देवा उरावन्तरिक्षे मर्जयन्त शुभ्राः|	here on their path the noble gods proceeded in the wide firmament the beauteous decked them.
अर्वाक पथ उरुज्रयः कर्णुध्वं शरोता दूतस्य जग्मुषो नो अस्य|	bend your way hither ye who travel widely hear this our envoy who hath gone to meet you.
ते हि यज्ञेषु यज्ञियास ऊमाः सधस्थं विश्वे अभि सन्ति देवाः|	for they are holy aids at sacrifices all gods approach the place of congregation.
तानध्वर उशतो यक्ष्यग्ने शरुष्टी भगं नासत्या पुरन्धिम|	bring these desirous to our worship agni swift the nisatyas bhaga and purandhi.
आग्ने गिरो दिव आ पर्थिव्या मित्रं वह वरुणमिन्द्रमग्निम|	agni to these mens hymns from earth from heaven bring mitra varuṇa indra and agni.
आर्यमणमदितिं विष्णुमेषां सरस्वती मरुतो मादयन्ताम|	and aryaman and aditi and viṣṇu sarasvatī be joyful and the maruts.
ररे हव्यं मतिभिर्यज्ञियानां नक्षत कामं मर्त्यानामसिन्वन|	even as the holy wish the gift is offered may he unsated come when men desire him.
धाता रयिमविदस्यं सदासां सक्षीमहि युज्येभिर्नु देवैः|	give neverfailing everconquering riches with gods for our allies may we be victors.
नू रोदसी अभिष्टुते वसिष्ठैरतावानो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निः|	now have both worlds been praised by the vasisthas and holy mitra varuṇa and agni.
यछन्तु चन्द्रा उपमं नो अर्कं यूयं पात|	may they bright deities make our song supremest preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
क ईं वयक्ता नरः सनीळा रुद्रस्य मर्या अध सवश्वाः|	wno are these radiant men in serried rank rudras young heroes borne by noble steeds.
नकिर्ह्येषां जनूंषि वेद ते अङग विद्रे मिथो जनित्रम|	verily no one knoweth whence they sprang they and they only know each others birth.
अभि सवपूभिर्मिथो वपन्त वातस्वनसः शयेना अस्प्र्ध्रन|	they strew each other with their blasts these hawks they strove together roaring like the wind.
एतानि धीरो निण्या चिकेत पर्श्निर्यदूधो मही जभार|	a sage was he who knew these mysteries what in her udder mighty pṛśni bore.
सा विट सुवीरा मरुद्भिरस्तु सनात सहन्ती पुष्यन्ती नर्म्णम|	ever victorious through the maruts be this band of heroes nursing manly strength.
यामं येष्ठाः शुभा शोभिष्ठाः शरिया सम्मिश्ला ओजोभिरुग्राः|	most bright in splendour flectest on their way closeknit to glory strong with varied power.
उग्रं व ओज सथिरा शवांस्यधा मरुद्भिर्गणस्तुविष्मान|	yea mighty is your power and firm your strength so potent with the maruts be the band.
शुभ्रो वः शुष्मः करुध्मी मनांसि धुनिर्मुनिरिव शर्धस्य धर्ष्णोः|	bright is your spirit wrathful are your minds your bold troops minstrel is like one inspired.
सनेम्यस्मद युयोत दिद्युं मा वो दुर्मतिरिह परणं नः|	ever avert your blazing shaft from us and let not your displeasure reach us here.
परिया वो नाम हुवे तुराणामा यत तर्पन मरुतो वावशानाः|	your dear names conquering maruts we invoke calling aloud till we are satisfied.
सवायुधास इष्मिणः सुनिष्का उत सवयं तन्वः शुम्भमानाः|	wellarmed impetuous in their haste they deck themselves their forms with oblations to you the pure ornaments made of gold.
शुची वो हव्या मरुतः शुचीनां शुचिं हिनोम्यध्वरं शुचिभ्यः|	pure maruts pure yourselves are your oblations to you the pure pure sacrifice i offer.
रतेन सत्यं रतसाप आयञ्छुचिजन्मानः शुचयः पावकाः|	by law they came to truth the laws observers bright by their birth and pure and sanctifying.
अंसेष्वा मरुतः खादयो वो वक्षस्सु रुक्मा उपशिश्रियाणाः|	your rings o maruts rest upon your shoulders and chains of gold are twined upon your bosoms.
वि विद्युतो न वर्ष्टिभी रुचाना अनु सवधामायुधैर्यछमानाः|	gleaming with drops of rain like lightningflashes after your wont ye whirl about your weapons.
पर बुध्न्या व ईरते महांसि पर नामानि परयज्यवस्तिरध्वम|	wide in the depth of air spread forth your glories far most adorable ye bear your titles.
सहस्रियं दम्यं भागमेतं गर्हमेधीयं मरुतो जुषध्वम|	maruts accept this thousandfold allotment of household sacrifice and household treasure.
यदि सतुतस्य मरुतो अधीथेत्था विप्रस्य वाजिनो हवीमन|	if maruts ye regard the praise recited here at this mighty singer invocation.
मक्षू रायः सुवीर्यस्य दात नू चिद यमन्य आदभदरावा|	vouchsafe us quickly wealth with noble heroes wealth which no man uho hateth us may injure.
अत्यासो न ये मरुतः सवञ्चो यक्षद्र्शो न शुभयन्त मर्याः|	the maruts fleet as coursers while they deck them like youths spectators of a festal meeting.
ते हर्म्येष्ठाः शिशवो न शुभ्रा वत्सासो न परक्रीळिनः पयोधाः|	linger like beauteous colts about the dwelling like frisking calves these who pour down the water.
दशस्यन्तो नो मरुतो मर्ळन्तु वरिवस्यन्तो रोदसी सुमेके|	so may the maruts help us and be gracious bringing free room to lovely earth and heaven.
आरे गोहा नर्हा वधो वो अस्तु सुम्नेभिरस्मे वसवो नमध्वम|	far be your bolt that slayeth men and cattle ye vasus turn yourselves to us with blessings.
आ वो होता जोहवीति सत्तः सत्राचीं रातिं मरुतो गर्णानः|	the priest when seated loudly calls you maruts praising in song your universal bounty.
य ईवतो वर्षणो अस्ति गोपाः सो अद्वयावी हवते व उक्थैः|	he bulls who hath so much in his possession free from duplicity with hymns invokes you.
इमे तुरं मरुतो रामयन्तीमे सहः सहस आ नमन्ति|	these maruts bring the swift man to a standstill and strength with mightier strength they break and humble.
इमेशंसं वनुष्यतो नि पान्ति गुरु दवेषो अररुषे दधन्ति|	these guard the singer from the man who hates him and lay their sore displeasure on the wicked.
इमे रध्रं चिन मरुतो जुनन्ति भर्मिं चिद यथा वसवो जुषन्त|	these maruts rouse even the poor and needy the vasus love him as an active champion.
अप बाधध्वं वर्षणस्तमांसि धत्त विश्वं तनय|	drive to a distance o ye bulls the darkness give us full store of children and descendants.
ं तोकमस्मे|	never o maruts may we lose your bounty nor carborne lords be hitidmost when ye deal it.
मा वो दात्रान मरुतो निरराम मा पश्चाद दघ्म रथ्यो विभागे|	give us a share in that delightful treasure the genuine wealth that bulls is your possession.
आ न सपार्हे भजतना वसव्ये यदीं सुजातं वर्षणो वो अस्ति|	what time the men in fury rush together for running streams for pastures and for houses.
सं यद धनन्त मन्युभिर्जनासः शूरा यह्वीष्वोषधीषु विक्षु|	then o ye maruts ye who spring from rudra be our protectors in the strife with foemen.
अध समा नो मरुतो रुद्रियासस्त्रातारो भूत पर्तनास्वर्यः|	full many a deed ye did for our forefathers worthy of lauds which even of old they sang you.
भूरि चक्र मरुतः पित्र्याण्युक्थानि या वः शस्यन्ते पुरा चित|	lle strong man with the maruts wins in battle the charger with the maruts gains the booty.
मरुद्भिरुग्रः पर्तनासु साळ्हा मरुद्भिरित सनिता वाजमर्वा|	ours o ye maruts be the vigorous hero the lord divine of men the strong sustainer.
अस्मे वीरो मरुतः शुष्म्यस्तु जनानां यो असुरो विधर्ता|	with whom to fair lands we may cross the waters and dwell in our own home with you beside us.
अपो येन सुक्षितये तरेमाध सवमोको अभि वः सयाम|	may indra mitra varuṇa and agni waters and plants and trees accept our praises.
तन न इन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निर|	may we find shelter in the maruts bosom preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
इयं वामस्य मन्मन इन्द्राग्नी पूर्व्यस्तुतिः|	as rain from out the cloud for you indra and agni from my soul.
अभ्राद वर्ष्टिरिवाजनि|	this noblest praise hath been produced.
शर्णुतं जरितुर्हवमिन्द्राग्नी वनतं गिरः|	do ye o indraagni hear the singers call accept his songs.
ईशानापिप्यतं धियः|	ye rulers grant his hearts desire.
मा पापत्वाय नो नरेन्द्राग्नी माभिशस्तये|	give us not up to poverty ye heroes indraagni nor.
मा नो रीरधतं निदे|	to slander and reproach of men.
इन्द्रे अग्ना नमो बर्हत सुव्र्क्तिमेरयामहे|	to indra and to agni we bring reverence high and holy hymn.
धिया धेना अवस्यवः|	and craving help softwords with prayer.
ता हि शश्वन्त ईळत इत्था विप्रास ऊतये|	for all these holy singers here implore these twain to succour them.
सबाधो वाजसातये|	and priests that they may win them strength.
ता वां गीर्भिर्विपन्यवः परयस्वन्तो हवामहे|	eager to laudyou we with songs invoke you bearing sacred food.
मेधसाता सनिष्यवः|	fain for success in sacrifice.
इन्द्राग्नी अवसा गतमस्मभ्यं चर्षणीसहा|	indra and agni come to us with favour ye who conquer men.
मा नो दुःशंस ईशत|	let not the wicked master us.
मा कस्य नो अररुषो धूर्तिः परणं मर्त्यस्य|	at no time let the injurious blow of hostile mortal fall on us.
इन्द्राग्नीशर्म यछतम|	o indraagni shelter us.
गोमद धिरण्यवद वसु यद वामश्वावदीमहे|	whatever wealth we crave of you in gold in cattle or in steeds.
इन्द्राग्नीतद वनेमहि|	that indraagni let us gain.
यत सोम आ सुते नर इन्द्राग्नी अजोहवुः|	when heroes prompt in worship call indra and agni lords of steeds.
सप्तीवन्ता सपर्यवः|	beside the soma juice effused.
उक्थेभिर्व्र्त्रहन्तमा या मन्दाना चिदा गिरा|	call hither with the song and lauds those who best slay the foemen those.
आङगूषैराविवासतः|	who take delight in hymns of praise.
ताविद दुःशंसं मर्त्यं दुर्विद्वांसं रक्षस्विनम|	slay ye the wicked man whose thought is evil of the demon kind.
आभोगं हन्मना हतमुदधिं हन्मना हतम|	slay him who stays the waters slay the serpent with your deadly dart.
आदित्यानामवसा नूतनेन सक्षीमहि शर्मणा शन्तमेन|	through the Ādityas most auspicious shelter through their most recent succour may we conquer.
अनागास्त्वे अदितित्वे तुरास इमं यज्ञं दधतु शरोषमाणाः|	may they the mighty giving ear establish this sacrifice to make us free and sinless.
आदित्यासो अदितिर्मादयन्तां मित्रो अर्यमा वरुणो रजिष्ठाः|	let aditi rejoice and the Ādityas varuṇa mitra aryaman most righteous.
अस्माकं सन्तु भुवनस्य गोपाः पिबन्तु सोममवसे नो अद्य|	may they the guardians of the world protect us and to show favour drink this day our soma.
आदित्या विश्वे मरुतश्च विश्वे देवाश्च विश्व रभवश्च विश्वे|	all universal deities the maruts all the Ādityas yea and all the Ṛbhus.
इन्द्रो अग्निरश्विना तुष्टुवाना यूयं पात|	indra and agni and the aśvins lauded preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
उग्रो जज्ञे वीर्याय सवधावाञ्चक्रिरपो नर्यो यत करिष्यन|	strong godlynatured born for hero exploit mans friend hedoth whatever deed he willeth.
जग्मिर्युवा नर्षदनमवोभिस्त्राता न इन्द्र एनसो महश्चित|	saving us een from great transgression indra the youthful visiteth mans home with favour.
हन्त वर्त्रमिन्द्रः शूशुवानः परावीन नु वीरो जरितारमूती|	waxing greatness indra slayeth vṛtra the hero with his aid hath helped the singer.
कर्ता सुदासे अह वा उ लोकं दाता वसु मुहुरा दाशुषे भूत|	he gave sudās wide room and space and often hath granted wealth to him who brought oblations.
युध्मो अनर्वा खजक्र्त समद्वा शूरः सत्राषाड जनुषेमषाळ्हः|	soldier unchecked warrousing battling hero unconquered from of old victorious ever.
वयास इन्द्रः पर्तनाः सवोजा अधा विश्वंशत्रूयन्तं जघान|	indra the very strong hath scattered armies yea he hath slain each foe who fought against him.
उभे चिदिन्द्र रोदसी महित्वा पप्राथ तविषीभिस्तुविष्मः|	thou with thy greatness hast filled full o indra even both the worlds with might o thou most mighty.
नि वज्रमिन्द्रो हरिवान मिमिक्षन समन्धसा मदेषु वाुवोच|	lord of bays indra brandishing his thunder is gratified with soma at the banquet.
वर्षा जजान वर्षणं रणाय तमु चिन नारी नर्यं ससूव|	a bull begat the bull for joy of battle and a strong mother brought forth him the manly.
पर यः सेनानीरध नर्भ्यो अस्तीनः सत्वा गवेषणः स धर्ष्णुः|	he who is chief of men their armies leader is strong hero bold and fain for booty.
नू चित स भरेषते जनो न रेषन मनो यो अस्य घोरमाविवासात|	the people falter not nor suffer sorrow who win themselves this gods terrific spirit.
यज्ञैर्य इन्द्रे दधते दुवांसि कषयत स राय रतपा रतेजाः|	he who with sacrifices worships indra is lord of wealth lawborn and laws protector.
यदिन्द्र पूर्वो अपराय शिक्षन्नयज्ज्यायान कनीयसो देष्णम|	wheneer the elder fain would help the younger the greater cometh to the lessers present.
अम्र्त इत पर्यासीत दूरमा चित्र चित्र्यं भरा रयिं नः|	shall the immortal sit aloof inactive o wondrous indra bring us wondrous riches.
यस्त इन्द्र परियो जनो ददाशदसन निरेके अद्रिवः सखा ते|	thy dear folk indra who present oblations are in chief place thy friends o thunderwielder.
वयं ते अस्यां सुमतौ चनिष्ठाः सयाम वरूथे अघ्नतो नर्पीतौ|	may we be best content in this thy favour sheltered by one who slays not but preserves us.
एष सतोमो अचिक्रदद वर्षा त उत सतामुर्मघवन्नक्रपिष्ट|	to thee the mighty hymn hath clamoured loudly and maghavan the eloquent hath besought thee.
रायस कामो जरितारं त आगन तवमङग शक्र वस्व आशको नः|	desire of wealth hath come upon thy singer help us then gakra to our share of riches.
स न इन्द्र तवयताया इषे धास्त्मना च ये मघवानो जुनन्ति|	place us by food which thou hast given o indra us and the wealthy patrons who command us.
वस्वी षु ते जरित्रे अस्तु शक्तिर्यूयं पात|	let thy great power bring good to him who lauds thee ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
शुचिं नु सतोमं नवजातमद्येन्द्राग्नी वर्त्रहणा जुषेथाम|	slayers of enemies indra and agni accept this day our newborn pure laudation.
उभा हि वां सुहवा जोहवीमि ता वाजं सद्य उशतेधेष्ठा|	again again i call you prompt to listen best to give quickly strength to him who craves it.
ता सानसी शवसाना हि भूतं साकंव्र्धा शवसा शूशुवांसा|	for ye were strong to gain exceeding mighty growing together waxing in your vigour.
कषयन्तौ रायो यवसस्य भूरेः पर्ङकतं वाजस्य सथविरस्य घर्ष्वेः|	lords of the pasture filled with ample riches bestow upon us strength both fresh and lasting.
उपो ह यद विदथं वाजिनो गुर्धीभिर्विप्राः परमतिमिछमानाः|	yea when the strong have entered our assembly and singers seeking with their hymns your favour.
अर्वन्तो न काष्ठां नक्षमाणा इन्द्राग्नी जोहुवतो नरस्ते|	they are like steeds who come into the racecourse those men who call aloud on indraagni.
गीर्भिर्विप्रः परमतिमिछमान ईट्टे रयिं यशसं पूर्वभाजम|	the singer seeking with his hymns your favour begs splendid riches of their first possessor.
इन्द्राग्नी वर्त्रहणा सुवज्रा पर नो नव्येभिस्तिरतं देष्णैः|	further us with new bounties indraagni armed with strong thunder slayers of the foeman.
सं यन मही मिथती सपर्धमाने तनूरुचा शूरसाता यतैते|	when two great hosts arrayed against each other meet clothed with brightness in the fierce encounter.
अदेवयुं विदथे देवयुभिः सत्रा हतं सोमसुता जनेन|	stand ye beside the godly smite the godless and still assist the men who press the soma.
इमामु षु सोमसुतिमुप न एन्द्राग्नी सौमनसाय यातम|	to this our somapressing indraagni come ye prepared to show your lovingkindness.
नू चिद धि परिमम्नाथे अस्माना वां शश्वद्भिर्वव्र्तीय वाजैः|	for not at any time have ye despised us so may i draw you with all strengthenings hither.
सो अग्न एना नमसा समिद्धोअछा मित्रं वरुणमिन्द्रं वोचेः|	so agni kindled mid this adoration invite thou mitra varuṇa and indra.
यत सीमागश्चक्र्मा तत सु मर्ळ तदर्यमादितिःशिश्रथन्तु|	forgive whatever sin we have committed may aryaman and aditi remove it.
एता अग्न आशुषाणास इष्टीर्युवोः सचाभ्यश्याम वाजान|	while we accelerate these our sacrifices may we win strength from both of you o agni.
मेन्द्रो नो विष्णुर्मरुतः परि खयन यूयं पात|	neer may the maruts indra viṣṇu slight us preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
तवे ह यत पितरश्चिन न इन्द्र विश्वा वामा जरितारो असन्वन|	all is with thee o indra all the treasures which erst our fathers won who sang thy praises.
तवे गावः सुदुघास्त्वे हयश्वास्त्वं वसु देवयतेवनिष्ठः|	with thee are milchkine good to milk and horses best winner thou of riches for the pious.
राजेव हि जनिभिः कषेष्येवाव दयुभिरभि विदुष कविः सन|	for like a king among his wives thou dwellest with glories as a sage surround and help us.
पिशा गिरो मघवन गोभिरश्वैस्त्वायतः शिशीहिराये अस्मान|	make us thy servants strong for wealth and honour our songs wirth kine and steeds and decoration.
इमा उ तवा पस्प्र्धानासो अत्र मन्द्रा गिरो देवयन्तीरुप सथुः|	here these our holy hymns with joy and gladness in pious emulation have approached thee.
अर्वाची ते पथ्या राय एतु सयाम ते सुमताविन्द्र शर्मन|	hitherward come thy path that leads to riches may we find shelter in thy favour indra.
धेनुं न तवा सूयवसे दुदुक्षन्नुप बरह्माणि सस्र्जे वसिष्ठः|	vasiṣṭha hath poured forth his prayers desiring to milk thee like a cow in goodly pasture.
तवामिन मे गोपतिं विश्व आहा न इन्द्रः सुमतिं गन्त्वछ|	all these my people call thee lord of cattle may indra come unto the prayer we offer.
अर्णांसि चित पप्रथाना सुदास इन्द्रो गाधान्यक्र्णोत सुपारा|	what though the floods spread widely indra made them shallow and easy for sudās to traverse.
शर्धन्तं शिम्युमुचथस्य नव्यः शापं सिन्धूनामक्र्णोदशस्तीः|	he worthy of our praises caused the simyu foe of our hymn to curse the rivers fury.
पुरोळा इत तुर्वशो यक्षुरासीद राये मत्स्यासो निशिता अपीव|	eager for spoil was turvaśa purodas fain to win wealth like fishes urged by hunger.
शरुष्टिं चक्रुर्भ्र्गवो दरुह्यवश्च सखा सखायमतरद विषूचोः|	the bhṛgus and the druhyus quickly listened friend rescued friend mid the two distant peoples.
आ पक्थासो भलानसो भनन्तालिनासो विषाणिनः शिवासः|	together came the pakthas the bhalanas the alinas the sivas the visanins.
आ योअनयत सधमा आर्यस्य गव्या तर्त्सुभ्यो अजगन युधा नर्न|	yet to the trtsus came the Āryas comrade through love of spoil and heroes war to lead them.
दुराध्यो अदितिं सरेवयन्तोअचेतसो वि जग्र्भ्रे परुष्णीम|	fools in their folly fain to waste her waters they parted inexhaustible paruṣṇī.
मह्नाविव्यक पर्थिवीं पत्यमानः पशुष कविरशयच्चायमानः|	lord of the earth he with his might repressed them still lay the herd and the affrighted herdsman.
ईयुरर्थं न नयर्थं परुष्णीमाशुश्चनेदभिपित्वं जगाम|	as to their goal they sped to their destruetion they sought paruṣṇī een the swift returned not.
सुदास इन्द्रः सुतुकानमित्रानरन्धयन मानुषे वध्रिवाचः|	indra abandoned to sudās the manly the swiftly flying foes unmanly babblers.
ईयुर्गावो न यवसादगोपा यथाक्र्तमभि मित्रं चितासः|	they went like kine unherded from the pasture each clinging to a friend as chance directed.
पर्श्निगावः पर्श्निनिप्रेषितासः शरुष्टिं चक्रुर्नियुतो रन्तयश्च|	they who drive spotted steeds sent down by pṛśni gave ear the warriors and the harnessed horses.
एकं च यो विंशतिं च शरवस्या वैकर्णयोर्जनान राजा नयस्तः|	the king who scattered oneandtwenty people of both vaikarna tribes through lust of glory.
दस्मो न सद्मन नि शिशाति बर्हिः शूरः सर्गमक्र्णोदिन्द्र एषाम|	as the skilled priest clips grass within the chamber so hath the hero indra wrought their downfall.
अध शरुतं कवषं वर्द्धमप्स्वनु दरुह्युं नि वर्णग वज्रबाहुः|	thou thunderarmed oerwhelmedst in the waters famed ancient kavasa and then the druhyu.
वर्णाना अत्र सख्याय सख्यं तवायन्तो ये अमदन्ननु तवा|	others here claiming friendship to their friendship devoted unto thee in thee were joyful.
वि सद्यो विश्वा दरंहितान्येषामिन्द्रः पुरः सहसा सप्त दर्दः|	indra at once with conquering might demolished all their strong places and their seven castles.
वयानवस्य तर्त्सवे गयं भाग जेष्म पूरुं विदथे मर्ध्रवाचम|	the goods of anus son he gave to trtsu may we in sacrifice conquer scorned pūru.
नि गव्यवोअनवो दरुह्यवश्च षष्टिः शता सुषुपुः षट सहस्रा|	the anavas and druhyus seeking booty have slept the sixty hundred yea six thousand.
षष्टिर्वीरासो अधि षड दुवोयु विश्वेदिन्द्रस्य वीर्या कर्तानि|	and sixandsixty heroes for the pious were all these mighty exploits done by indra.
इन्द्रेणैते तर्त्सवो वेविषाणा आपो न सर्ष्टा अधवन्त नीचीः|	these trtsus under indras careful guidance came speeding like loosed waters rushing downward.
दुर्मित्रासः परकलविन मिमाना जहुर्विश्वानि भोजना सुदासे|	the foemen measuring exceeding closely abandoned to sudās all their provisions.
अर्धं वीरस्य शर्तपामनिन्द्रं परा शर्धन्तं नुनुदे अभि कषाम|	the heros side who drank the dressed oblation indras denier far oer earth he scattered.
इन्द्रो मन्युं मन्युम्यो मिमाय भेजे पथो वर्तनिम्पत्यमानः|	indra brought down the fierce destroyers fury he gave them various roads the paths controller.
आध्रेण चित तद वेकं चकार सिंह्यं चित पेत्वेना जघान|	een with the weak he wrought this matchless exploit een with a goat he did to death a lion.
अव सरक्तीर्वेश्याव्र्श्चदिन्द्रः परायछद विश्वा भोजना सुदासे|	he pared the pillars angles with a needle thus to sudās indra gave all provisions.
शश्वन्तो हि शत्रवो रारधुष टे भेदस्य चिच्छर्धतो विन्द रन्धिम|	to thee have all thine enemies submitted een the fierce bheda hast thou made thy subject.
मर्तानेन सतुवतो यः कर्णोति तिग्मं तस्मिन नि जहि वज्रमिन्द्र|	cast down thy sharpened thunderbolt o indra on him who harms the men who sing thy praises.
आवदिन्द्रं यमुना तर्त्सवश्च परात्र भेदं सर्वतातामुषायत|	yamuna and the trtsus aided indra there he stripped bheda bare of all his treasures.
अजासश्च शिग्रवो यक्षवश्च बलिं शीर्षाणि जभ्रुरश्व्यानि|	the ajas and the sigrus and the yaksus brought in to him as tribute heads of horses.
न त इन्द्र सुमतयो न रायः संचक्षे पूर्वा उषसो न नूत्नाः|	not to be scorned but like dawns past and recent o indra are thy favours and thy riches.
देवकं चिन मान्यमानं जघन्थाव तमना बर्हतः शम्बरं भेत|	devaka mānyamanas son thou slewest and smotest Śambara from the lofty mountain.
पर ये गर्हादममदुस्त्वाया पराशरः शतयातुर्वसिष्ठः|	they who from home have gladdened thee thy servants parasara vasiṣṭha satayatu.
न ते भोजस्य सख्यं मर्षन्ताधा सूरिभ्यः सुदिना वयुछान|	will not forget thy friendship liberal giver so shall the days dawn prosperous for the princes.
दवे नप्तुर्देववतः शते गोर्द्वा रथा वधूमन्ता सुदासः|	priestlike with praise i move around the altar earning paijavanas reward o agni.
अर्हन्नग्ने पैजवनस्य दानं होतेव सद्म पर्येमि रेभन|	two hundred cows from devavans descendant two chariots from sudās with mares to draw them.
चत्वारो मा पैजवनस्य दानाः समद्दिष्टयः कर्शनिनो निरेके|	gift of paijavana four horses bear me in foremost place trained steeds with pearl to deck them.
रज्रासो मा पर्थिविष्ठाः सुदासस्तोकं तोकाय शरवसे वहन्ति|	sudāss brown steeds firmlystepping carry me and my son for progeny and glory.
यस्य शरवो रोदसी अन्तरुर्वी शीर्ष्णेशीर्ष्णे विबभाजा विभक्ता|	him whose fame spreads between wide earth and heaven who as dispenser gives each chief his portion.
सप्तेदिन्द्रं न सरवतो गर्णन्ति नि युध्यामधिमशिशादभीके|	seven flowing rivers glorify like indra he slew yudhyamadhi in close encounter.
इमं नरो मरुतः सश्चतानु दिवोदासं न पितरं सुदासः|	attend on him o ye heroic maruts as on sudāss father divodāsa.
अविष्टना पैजवनस्य केतं दूणाशं कषत्रमजरं दुवोयु|	further paijavanas desire with favour guard faithfully his lasting firm dominion.
अगन्म महा नमसा यविष्ठं यो दीदाय समिद्धः सवे दुरोणे|	we with great reverence have approached the youngest who hath shone forth wellkindled in his dwelling.
चित्रभानुं रोदसी अन्तरुर्वी सवाहुतं विश्वतः परत्यञ्चम|	with wondrous light between wide earth and heaven wellworshipped looking forth in all directions.
स मह्ना विश्वा दुरितानि साह्वानग्निः षटवे दम आ जातवेदाः|	through his great might oercoming all misfortunes praised in the house is agni jātavedas.
स नो रक्षिषद दुरितादवद्यादस्मान गर्णत उत नो मघोनः|	may he protect us from disgrace and trouble both us who laud him and our noble patrons.
तवं वरुण उत मित्रो अग्ने तवां वर्धन्ति मतिभिर्वसिष्ठाः|	o agni thou art varuṇa and mitra vasisthas with their holy hymns exalt thee.
तवे वसु सुषणनानि सन्तु यूयं पात|	with thee be most abundant gain of treasure ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
तिस्रो वाचः पर वद जयोतिरग्रा या एतद दुह्रे मधुदोघम ऊधः|	speak forth three words the words which light precedeth which milk this udder that produceth nectar.
स वत्सं कर्ण्वन गर्भम ओषधीनां सद्यो जातो वर्षभो रोरवीति|	quickly made manifest the bull hath bellowed engendering the germ of plants the infant.
यो वर्धन ओषधीनां यो अपां यो विश्वस्य जगतो देव ईशे|	giver of growth to plants the god who ruleth over the waters and all moving creatures.
स तरिधातु शरणं शर्म यंसत तरिवर्तु जयोतिः सवभिष्ट्य अस्मे|	vouchsafe us triple shelter for our refuge and threefold light to succour and befriend us.
सतरीर उ तवद भवति सूत उ तवद यथावशं तन्वं चक्र एषः|	now he is sterile now begetteth offspring even as he willeth doth he change his figure.
पितुः पयः परति गर्भ्णाति माता तेन पिता वर्धते तेन पुत्रः|	the fathers genial flow bedews the mother therewith the sire therewith the son is nourished.
यस्मिन विश्वानि भुवनानि तस्थुस तिस्रो दयावस तरेधा सस्रुर आपः|	in him all living creatures have their being and the three heavens with triplyflowing waters.
तरयः कोशास उपसेचनासो मध्व शचोतन्त्य अभितो विरप्शम|	three reservoirs that sprinkle down their treasure shed their sweet streams around him with a murmur.
इदं वचः पर्जन्याय सवराजे हर्दो अस्त्व अन्तरं तज जुजोषत|	may this my song to sovran lord parjanya come near unto his heart and give him pleasure.
मयोभुवो वर्ष्टयः सन्त्व अस्मे सुपिप्पला ओषधीर देवगोपाः|	may we obtain the showers that bring enjoyment and godprotected plants with goodly fruitage.
स रेतोधा वर्षभः शश्वतीनां तस्मिन्न आत्मा जगतस तस्थुषश च|	he is the bull of all and their impregner he holds the life of all things fixed and moving.
तन म रतम पातु शतशारदाय यूयम पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	may this rite save me till my hundredth autumn preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
बरह्मा ण इन्द्रोप याहि विद्वानर्वाञ्चस्ते हरयः सन्तु युक्ताः|	come to our prayers o indra thou who knowest let thy bay steeds be yoked and guided hither.
विश्वे चिद धि तवा विहवन्त मर्ता अस्माकमिच्छ्र्णुहि विश्वमिन्व|	though mortal men on every side invoke thee still give thine ear to us o allimpeller.
हवं त इन्द्र महिमा वयानड बरह्म यत पासि शवसिन्न्र्षीणाम|	thy greatness reacheth to our invocation the sages prayer which potent god thou guardest.
आ यद वज्रं दधिषे हस्त उग्र घोरः सन करत्वा जनिष्ठा अषाळः|	what time thy hand o mighty holds the thunder awful in strength thou hast become resistless.
तव परणीतीन्द्र जोहुवानान सं यन नॄन न रोदसी निनेथ|	what time thou drewest both worldhalves together like heroes led by thee who call each other.
महे कषत्राय शवसे हि जज्ञेअतूतुजिं चित तूतुजिरशिश्नत|	for thou wast born for strength and high dominionthen een the active overthrew the sluggish.
एभिर्न इन्द्राहभिर्दशस्य दुर्मित्रासो हि कषितयः पवन्ते|	honour us in these present days o indra for hostile men are making expiation.
परति यच्चष्टे अन्र्तमनेना अव दविता वरुणो मायीनः सात|	our sin that sinless varuṇa discovered the wondrouswise hath long ago forgiven.
वोचेमेदिन्द्रं मघवानमेनं महो रायो राधसो यद ददन्नः|	we will address this liberal lord this indra that he may grant us gifts of ample riches.
यो अर्चतो बरह्मक्र्तिमविष्ठो यूयं पात|	best favourer of the singers prayer and praises preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
योनिष ट इन्द्र सदने अकारि तमा नर्भिः पुरुहूत पर याहि|	a home is made for thee to dwell in indra o muchinvoked go thitherwith the heroes.
असो यथा नोअविता वर्धे च ददो वसूनि ममदश्च सोमैः|	that thou to prosper us mayst be our helper vouchsafe us wealth rejoice with draughts of soma.
गर्भीतं ते मन इन्द्र दविबर्हाः सुतः सोमः परिषिक्ता मधूनि|	indra thy wish twicestrong is comprehended pressed is the soma poured are pleasant juices.
विस्र्ष्टधेना भरते सुव्र्क्तिरियमिन्द्रं जोहुवती मनीषा|	this hymn of praise from loosened tongue made perfect draws indra to itself with loud invoking.
आ नो दिव आ पर्थिव्या रजीषिन्निदं बर्हिः सोमपेयाय याहि|	come thou impetuous god from earth or heaven come to our holy grass to drink the soma.
वहन्तु तवा हरयो मद्र्यञ्चमाङगूषमछा तवसं मदाय|	hither to me let thy bay horses bring thee to listen to our hymns and make thee joyful.
आ नो विश्वाभिरूतिभिः सजोषा बरह्म जुषाणो हर्यश्वयाहि|	come unto us with all thine aids accordant lord of bay steeds accepting our devotions.
वरीव्र्जत सथविरेभिः सुशिप्रास्मे दधद वर्षणं शुष्ममिन्द्र|	fairhelmeted oercoming with the mighty and lending us the strength of bulls o indra.
एष सतोमो मह उग्राय वाहे धुरीवात्यो न वाजयन्नधायि|	as to the chariot pole a vigorous courser this laud is brought to the great strong upholder.
इन्द्र तवायमर्क ईट्टे वसूनां दिवीव दयामधि नः शरोमतं धाः|	this hymn solicits wealth of thee in heaven as twere above the sky set thou our glory.
एवा न इन्द्र वार्यस्य पूर्धि पर ते महीं सुमतिं वेविदाम|	with precious things o indra thus content us may we attain to thine exalted favour.
इषं पिन्व मघवद्भ्यः सुवीरां यूयं पात|	send our chiefs plenteous food with hero children preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
मध्वो वो नाम मारुतं यजत्राः पर यज्ञेषु शवसा मदन्ति|	yea through the power of your sweet juice ye holy the marut host is glad at sacrifices.
ये रेजयन्ति रोदसी चिदुर्वी पिन्वन्त्युत्सं यदयासुरुग्राः|	they cause even spacious heaven and earth to tremble they make the spring flow when they come the mighty.
निचेतारो हि मरुतो गर्णन्तं परणेतारो यजमानस्य मन्म|	the maruts watch the man who sings their praises promoters of the thought of him who worships.
अस्माकमद्य विदथेषु बर्हिरा वीतये सदत पिप्रियाणाः|	seat you on sacred grass in our assembly this day with friendly minds to share the banquet.
नैतावदन्ये मरुतो यथेमे भराजन्ते रुक्मैरायुधैस्तनूभिः|	no others gleam so brightly as these maruts with their own forms their golden gauds their weapons.
आ रोदसी विश्वपिशः पिशानाः समानमञ्ज्यञ्जते शुभे कम|	with all adornments decking earth and heaven they heighten for bright show their common splendour.
रधक सा वो मरुतो दिद्युदस्तु यद व आगः पुरुषता कराम|	far from us be your blazing dart o maruts when we through human frailty sin against you.
मा वस्तस्यामपि भूमा यजत्रा अस्मे वो अस्तु सुमतिश्चनिष्ठा|	let us not he exposed to that ye holy may your most loving favour still attend us.
कर्ते चिदत्र मरुतो रणन्तानवद्यासः शुचयः पावकाः|	may even what we have done delight the maruts the blameless ones the bright the purifying.
पर णोअवत सुमतिभिर्यजत्राः पर वाजेभिस्तिरत पुष्यसे नः|	further us o ye holy with your kindness advance us mightily that we may prosper.
उत सतुतासो मरुतो वयन्तु विश्वेभिर्नामभिर्नरो हवींषि|	and may the maruts praised by all their titles heroes enjoy the taste of our oblations.
ददात नो अम्र्तस्य परजायै जिग्र्त रायः सून्र्ता मघानि|	give us of amṛta for the sake of offspring awake the excellent fair stores of riches.
आ सतुतासो मरुतो विश्व ऊती अछा सूरीन सर्वताता जिगात|	hither ye maruts praised with all your succours with all felicity come to our princes.
ये नस्त्मना शतिनो वर्धयन्ति यूयं पात|	who of themselves a hundredfold increase us preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
आ गोमता नासत्या रथेनाश्वावता पुरुश्चन्द्रेण यातम|	come o nāsatyas on your car resplendent rich in abundant wealth of kine and horses.
अभि वां विश्वा नियुतः सचन्ते सपार्हया शरिया तन्वा शुभाना|	as harnessed steeds all our laudations follow you whose forms shine with most delightful beauty.
आ नो देवेभिरुप यातमर्वाक सजोषसा नासत्या रथेन|	come with the gods associate come ye hither to us nāsatyas with your car accordant.
युवोर्हि नः सख्या पित्र्याणि समानो बन्धुरुत तस्य वित्तम|	twixt you and us there is ancestral friendship and common kin remember and regard it.
उदु सतोमासो अश्विनोरबुध्रञ जामि बरह्माण्युषसश्च देवीः|	awakened are the songs that praise the aśvins the kindred prayers and the celestial mornings.
आविवासन रोदसी धिष्ण्येमे अछा विप्रो नासत्या विवक्ति|	inviting those we long for earth and heaven the singer calleth these nāsatyas hither.
वि चेदुछन्त्यश्विना उषासः पर वां बरह्माणि कारवो भरन्ते|	what time the dawns break forth in light o aśvins to you the poets offer their devotions.
ऊर्ध्वं भानुं सविता देवो अश्रेद बर्हदग्नयः समिधा जरन्ते|	god savitar hath sent aloft his splendour and fires sing praises with the kindled fuel.
आ पश्चातान नासत्या पुरस्तादाश्विना यातमधरादुदक्तात|	come from the west come from the cast nāsatyas come aśvins from below and from above us.
आ विश्वतः पाञ्चजन्येन राया यूयं पात|	bring wealth from all sides for the fivefold people preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
यदद्य सूर्य बरवोअनागा उद्यन मित्राय वरुणाय सत्यम|	when thou o sun this day arising sinless shalt speak the truth to varuṇa and mitra.
वयं देवत्रादिते सयाम तव परियासो अर्यमन गर्णन्तः|	o aditi may all the deities love us and thou o aryaman while we are singing.
एष सय मित्रावरुणा नर्चक्षा उभे उदेति सूर्यो अभि जमन|	looking on man o varuṇa and mitra this sun ascendeth up by both the pathways.
विश्वस्य सथातुर्जगतश्च गोपा रजु मर्तेषु वर्जिना चपश्यन|	guardian of all things fixt of all that moveth beholding good and evil acts of mortals.
अयुक्त सप्त हरितः सधस्थाद या ईं वहन्ति सूर्यं घर्ताचीः|	he from their home hath yoked the seven gold coursers who dropping oil and fatness carry sūrya.
धामानि मित्रावरुणा युवाकुः सं यो यूथेव जनिमानि चष्टे|	yours varuṇa and mitra he surveyeth the worlds and living creatures like a herdsman.
उद वां पर्क्षासो मधुमन्तो अस्थुरा सूर्यो अरुहच्छुक्रमर्णः|	your coursers rich in store of sweets have mounted to the bright ocean sūrya hath ascended.
यस्मा आदित्या अध्वनो रदन्ति मित्रो अर्यमा वरुणःसजोषाः|	for whom the Ādityas make his pathway ready aryaman mitra varuṇa accordant.
इमे चेतारो अन्र्तस्य भूरेर्मित्रो अर्यमा वरुणो हि सन्ति|	for these even aryaman varuṇa and mitra are the chastisers of all guile and falsehood.
इम रतस्य वाव्र्धुर्दुरोणे शग्मासः पुत्रा अदितेरदब्धाः|	these aditis sons infallible and mighty have waxen in the home of law eternal.
इमे मित्रो वरुणो दूळभासोअचेतसं चिच्चितयन्ति दक्षैः|	these mitra varuṇa whom none deceiveth with great power quicken even the fool to wisdom.
अपि करतुं सुचेतसं वतन्तस्तिरश्चिदंहः सुपथानयन्ति|	and wakening moreover thoughtful insight lead it by easy paths oer grief and trouble.
इमे दिवो अनिमिषा पर्थिव्याश्चिकित्वांसो अचेतसं नयन्ति|	they ever vigilant with eyes that close not caring for heaven and earth lead on the thoughtless.
परव्राजे चिन नद्यो गाधमस्ति पारं नो अस्य विष्पितस्य पर्षन|	even in the rivers bed there is a shallow across this broad expanse may they conduct us.
यद गोपावददितिः शर्म भद्रं मित्रो यछन्ति वरुणः सुदासे|	when aditi and varuṇa and mitra like guardians give sudās their friendly shelter.
तस्मिन्ना तोकं तनयं दधाना मा कर्म देवहेळनं तुरासः|	granting him sons and lineal succession let us not bold ones move the gods to anger.
अव वेदिं होत्राभिर्यजेत रिपः काश्चिद वरुणध्रुतः सः|	may he with ofierings purify the altar from any stains of varuṇas reviler.
परि दवेषोभिरर्यमा वर्णक्तूरुं सुदासे वर्षणा उ लोकम|	aryaman save us us all those who hate us give room and freedom to sudās ye mighty.
सस्वश्चिद धि सम्र्तिस्त्वेष्येषामपीच्येन सहसा सहन्ते|	hid from our eyes is their resplendent meeting by their mysterious might they hold dominion.
युष्मद भिया वर्षणो रेजमाना दक्षस्य चिन महिना मर्ळता नः|	heroes we cry trembling in fear before you even in the greatness of your power have mercy.
यो बरह्मणे सुमतिमायजाते वाजस्य सातौ परमस्य रायः|	he who wins favour for his prayer by worship that he may gain him strength and highest riches.
सीक्षन्त मन्युं मघवानो अर्य उरु कषयाय चक्रिरे सुधातु|	that good mans mind the mighty ones will follow they have brought comfort to his spacious dwelling.
इयं देव पुरोहितिर्युवभ्यां यज्ञेषु मित्रावरुणावकारि|	this priestly task gods varuṇa and mitra hath been performed for you at sacrifices.
विश्वानि दुर्गा पिप्र्तं तिरो नो यूयं पात|	convey us safely over every peril preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
उत सूर्यो बर्हदर्चींष्यश्रेत पुरु विश्वा जनिम मानुषाणाम|	surya hath sent aloft his beams of splendour oer all the tribes of men in countless places.
समो दिवा दद्र्शे रोचमानः करत्वा कर्तः सुक्र्तःकर्त्र्भिर्भूत|	together with the heaven he shines apparent formed by his makers well with power and wisdom.
स सूर्य परति पुरो न उद गा एभिः सतोमेभिरेतशेभिरेवैः|	so hast thou mounted up before us sūrya through these our praises with fleet dappled horses.
पर नो मित्राय वरुणाय वोचोअनागसो अर्यम्णे अग्नये च|	declare us free from all offence to mitra and varuṇa and aryaman and agni.
वि नः सहस्रं शुरुधो रदन्त्व रतावानो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निः|	may holy agni varuṇa and mitra send down their riches upon us in thousands.
यछन्तु चन्द्रा उपमं नो अर्कमा नः कामं पूपुरन्तुस्तवानाः|	may they the bright ones make our praisesong perfect and when we laud them grant us all our wishes.
दयावाभूमी अदिते तरासीथां नो ये वां जज्ञुः सुजनिमान रष्वे|	o undivided heaven and earth preserve us us lofty ones your nobiyborn descendants.
मा हेळे भूम वरुणस्य वायोर्मा मित्रस्य परियतमस्य नर्णाम|	let us not anger varuṇa nor vāyu nor him the dearest friend of mortals mitra.
पर बाहवा सिस्र्तं जीवसे न आ नो गव्यूतिमुक्षतं घर्तेन|	stretch forth your arms and let our lives be lengthened with fatness dew the pastures of our cattle.
आ नो जने शरवयतं युवाना शरुतं मे मित्रावरुणा हवेमा|	ye youthful make us famed among the people hear mitravaruṇa these mine invocations.
नू मित्रो वरुणो अर्यमा नस्त्मने तोकाय वरिवो दधन्तु|	now mitra varuṇa aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room for us and for our children.
सुगा नो विश्वा सुपथानि सन्तु यूयं पात|	may we find paths all fair and good to travel preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
उदु बरह्माण्यैरत शरवस्येन्द्रं समर्ये महया वसिष्ठ|	prayers have been offered up through love of glory vasiṣṭha honour indra in the battle.
आ यो विश्वानि शवसा ततानोपश्रोता म ईवतो वचांसि|	he who with might extends through all existence hears words which i his faithful servant utter.
अयामि घोष इन्द्र देवजामिरिरज्यन्त यच्छुरुधो विवाचि|	a cry was raised which reached the gods o indra a cry to them to send us strength in combat.
नहि सवमायुश्चिकिते जनेषु तानीदंहांस्यति पर्ष्यस्मान|	none among men knows his own lifes duration bear us in safety over these our troubles.
युजे रथं गवेषणं हरिभ्यामुप बरह्माणि जुजुषाणमस्थुः|	the bays the bootyseeking car i harness my prayers have reached him who accepts them gladly.
वि बाधिष्ट सय रोदसी महित्वेन्द्रो वर्त्राण्यप्रती जघन्वान|	indra when he had slain resistless foemen forced with his might the two worldhalves asunder.
आपश्चित पिप्यु सतर्यो न गावो नक्षन्न्र्तं जरितारस्त इन्द्र|	like barren cows moreover swelled the waters the singen sought thy holy rite o indra.
याहि वायुर्न नियुतो न अछा तवं हि धीभिर्दयसे वि वाजान|	come unto us as with his team comes vāyu thou through our solemn hymns bestowest booty.
ते तवा मदा इन्द्र मादयन्तु शुष्मिणं तुविराधसं जरित्रे|	so may these gladdening draughts rejoice thee indra the mighty very bounteous to the singer.
एको देवत्रा दयसे हि मर्तानस्मिञ्छूर सवने मादयस्व|	alone among the gods thou pitiest mortals o hero make thee glad at this libation.
एवेदिन्द्रं वर्षणं वज्रबाहुं वसिष्ठासो अभ्यर्चन्त्यर्कैः|	thus the vasisthas glorify with praises indra the powerful whose arm wields thunder.
स न सतुतो वीरवत पातु गोमद यूयं पात|	praised may he guard our wealth in kine and heroes ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
शवित्यञ्चो मा दक्षिणतस्कपर्दा धियंजिन्वासो अभि हि परमन्दुः|	these who wear hairknots on the right the movers of holy thought whiterobed have won me over.
उत्तिष्ठन वोचे परि बर्हिषो नॄन न मे दूरादवितवे वसिष्ठाः|	i warned the men when from the grass i raised me not from afar can my vasisthas help you.
दूरादिन्द्रमनयन्ना सुतेन तिरो वैशन्तमति पान्तमुग्रम|	with soma they brought indra from a distance over vaisanta from the strong libation.
पाशद्युम्नस्य वायतस्य सोमात सुतादिन्द्रोअव्र्णीतावसिष्ठान|	indra preferred vasisthas to the soma pressed by the son of vayata pasadyumna.
एवेन नु कं सिन्धुमेभिस्ततारेवेन नु कं भेदमेभिर्जघान|	so verily with these he crossed the river in company with these he slaughtered bheda.
एवेन नु कं दाशराज्ञे सुदासं परावदिन्द्रो बरह्मणा वो वसिष्ठाः|	so in the fight with the ten kings vasisthas did indra help sudās through your devotions.
जुष्टी नरो बरह्मणा वः पितॄणामक्षमव्ययं न किला रिषाथ|	i gladly men i with prayer prayed by our fathers have fixed your axle ye shall not be injured.
यच्छक्वरीषु बर्हता रवेणेन्द्रे शुष्ममदधाता वसिष्ठाः|	since when ye sang aloud the sakvari verses vasisthas ye invigorated indra.
उद दयामिवेत तर्ष्णजो नाथितासोअदीधयुर्दाशराज्ञे वर्तासः|	like thirsty men they looked to heaven in battle with the ten kings surrounded and imploring.
वसिष्ठस्य सतुवत इन्द्रो अश्रोदुरुं तर्त्सुभ्यो अक्र्णोदु लोकम|	then indra heard vasiṣṭha as he praised him and gave the trtsus ample room and freedom.
दण्डा इवेद गोजनास आसन परिछिन्ना भरता अर्भकासः|	like sticks and staves wherewith they drive the cattle stripped bare the bharatas were found defenceless.
अभवच्च पुरेता वसिष्ठ आदित तर्त्सूनां विशो अप्रथन्त|	vasiṣṭha then became their chief and leader then widely were the trtsus clans extended.
तरयः कर्ण्वन्ति भुवनेषु रेतस्तिस्रः परजा आर्या जयोतिरग्राः|	three fertilize the worlds with genial moisture three noble creatures cast a light before them.
तरयो घर्मास उषसं सचन्ते सर्वानित ताननुविदुर्वसिष्ठाः|	three that give warmth to all attend the morning all these have they discovered these vasisthas.
सूर्यस्येव वक्षथो जयोतिरेषां समुद्रस्येव महिमा गभीरः|	like the suns growing glory is their splendour and like the seas is their unflathomed greatness.
वातस्येव परजवो नान्येन सतोमो वसिष्ठा अन्वेतवे वः|	their course is like the winds your laud vasisthas can never be attained by any other.
त इन निण्यं हर्दयस्य परकेतैः सहस्रवल्शमभि संचरन्ति|	they with perceptions of the heart in secret resort to that which spreads a thousand branches.
यमेन ततं परिधिं वयन्तोअप्सरस उप सेदुर्वसिष्ठाः|	the apsaras brought hither the vasisthas wearing the vesture spun for them by yama.
विद्युतो जयोतिः परि संजिहानं मित्रावरुणा यदपश्यतां तवा|	a form of lustre springing from the lightning wast thou when varuṇa and mitra saw thee.
तत ते जन्मोतैकं वसिष्ठागस्त्यो यत तवा विशाजभार|	tliy one and only birth was then vasiṣṭha when from thy stock agastya brought thee hither.
उतासि मैत्रावरुणो वसिष्ठोर्वश्या बरह्मन मनसोअधि जातः|	born of their love for urvasi vasiṣṭha thou priest art son of varuṇa and mitra.
दरप्सं सकन्नं बरह्मणा दैव्येन विश्वे देवाः पुष्करे तवाददन्त|	and as a fallen drop in heavenly fervour all the gods laid thee on a lotusblossorn.
स परकेत उभयस्य परविद्वान सहस्रदान उत वा सदानः|	he thinker knower both of earth and heaven endowed with many a gift bestowing thousands.
यमेन ततं परिधिं वयिष्यन्नप्सरसः परि जज्ञे वसिष्ठः|	destined to wear the vesture spun by yama sprang from the apsaras to life vasiṣṭha.
सत्रे ह जाताविषिता नमोभिः कुम्भे रेतः सिषिचतुः समानम|	born at the sacrifice urged by adorations both with a common flow bedewed the pitcher.
ततो ह मान उदियाय मध्यात ततो जातं रषिमाहुर्वसिष्ठम|	then from the midst thereof there rose up māna and thence they say was born the sage vasiṣṭha.
उक्थभ्र्तं सामभ्र्तं बिभर्ति गरावाणं बिभ्रत पर वदात्यग्रे|	he brings the bearer of the laud and sāman first shall he speak bringing the stone for pressing.
उपैनमाध्वं सुमनस्यमाना आ वो गछाति परत्र्दो वसिष्ठः|	with grateful hearts in reverence approach him to you o pratrdas vasiṣṭha cometh.
पर वो देवं चित सहसानमग्निमश्वं न वाजिनं हिषे नमोभिः|	i send forth even your god victorious agni like a strong courser with mine adoration.
भवा नो दूतो अध्वरस्य विद्वान तमना देवेषु विविदे मितद्रुः|	herald of sacrifice be he who knoweth he hath reached gods himself with measured motion.
आ याह्यग्ने पथ्या अनु सवा मन्द्रो देवानां सख्यं जुषाणः|	by paths that are thine own come hither agni joyous delighting in the gods alliance.
आ सानु शुष्मैर्नदयन पर्थिव्या जम्भेभिर्विश्वमुशधग वनानि|	making the heights of earth roar with thy fury burning with eager teeth the woods and forests.
पराचीनो यज्ञः सुधितं हि बर्हिः परीणीते अग्निरीळितो न होता|	the grass is strewn the sacrifice advances adored as priest agni is made propitious.
आ मातरा विश्ववारे हुवानो यतो यविष्ठ जज्ञिषे सुशेवः|	invoking both allboonbestowing mothers of whom most youthful thou wast born to help us.
सद्यो अध्वरे रथिरं जनन्त मानुषासो विचेतसो य एषाम|	forthwith the men the best of these for wisdom have made him leader in the solemn worship.
विशामधायि विश्पतिर्दुरोणेअग्निर्मन्द्रो मधुवचा रतावा|	as lord in homes of men is agni stablished the holy one the joyous sweetly speaking.
असादि वर्तो वह्निराजगन्वानग्निर्ब्रह्मा नर्षदने विधर्ता|	he hath come chosen bearer and is seated in mans home brahman agni the supporter.
दयौश्च यं पर्थिवी वाव्र्धाते आ यं होता यजति विश्ववारम|	he whom both heaven anct earth exalt and strengthenwhom giver of all boons the hotar worships.
एते दयुम्नेभिर्विश्वमातिरन्त मन्त्रं ये वारं नर्या अतक्षन|	these have passed all in glory who the manly have wrought with skill the hymn of adoration.
पर ये विशस्तिरन्त शरोषमाणा आ ये मे अस्य दीधयन्न्र्तस्य|	who listening have advanced the peoples welfare and set their thoughts on this my holy statute.
नू तवामग्न ईमहे वसिष्ठा ईशानं सूनो सहसो वसूनाम|	we the vasisthas now implore thee agni o son of strength the lord of wealth and treasure.
इषं सतोत्र्भ्यो मघवद्भ्य आनड यूयं पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
पर वो यज्ञेषु देवयन्तो अर्चन दयावा नमोभिः परिथिवी इषध्यै|	sing out the pious at your sacrifices to move with adorations earth and heaven.
येषां बरह्माण्यसमानि विप्रा विष्वग वियन्ति वनिनो न शाखाः|	the holy singers whose unmatched devotions like a trees branches part in all directions.
पर यज्ञ एतु हेत्वो न सप्तिरुद यछध्वं समनसो घर्ताचीः|	let sacrifice proceed like some fleet courser with one accord lift ye on high the ladles.
सत्र्णीत बर्हिरध्वराय साधूर्ध्वा शोचींषि देवयून्यस्थुः|	strew sacred grass meet for the solenm service bright flames that love the gods have mounted upward.
आ पुत्रासो न मातरं विभ्र्त्राः सानौ देवासो बर्हिषःसदन्तु|	like babes in arms reposing on their mother let the gods sit upon the grasss summit.
आ विश्वाची विदथ्यामनक्त्वग्ने मा नो देवताता मर्धस कः|	let general fire make bright the flame of worship scorn us not agni in the gods assembly.
ते सीषपन्त जोषमा यजत्रा रतस्य धाराः सुदुघा दुहानाः|	gladly the gods have let themselves be honoured milking the copious streams of holy order.
जयेष्ठं वो अद्य मह आ वसूनामा गन्तन समनसो यति षठ|	the highest might today is yours the vasits come ye as many as ye are oneminded.
एवा नो अग्ने विक्ष्वा दशस्य तवया वयं सहसावन्नास्क्राः|	so agni send us wealth among the people may we be closely knit to thee o victor.
राया युजा सधमादो अरिष्टा यूयं पात|	unharmed and rich and taking joy together preserve us evermore ye ods with blessings.
आपो यं वः परथमं देवयन्त इन्द्रपानमूर्मिमक्र्ण्वतेळः|	may we obtain this day from you o waters that wave of pure refreshment which the pious.
तं वो वयं शुचिमरिप्रमद्य घर्तप्रुषं मधुमन्तं वनेम|	made erst the special beverage of indra bright stainless rich in sweets and dropping fatness.
तमूर्मिमापो मधुमत्तमं वोअपां नपादवत्वाशुहेमा|	may the floods offspring he whose course is rapid protect that wave most rich in sweets o waters.
यस्मिन्निन्द्रो वसुभिर्मादयाते तमश्याम देवयन्तो वो अद्य|	that shall make indra and the vasus joyful this may we gain from you today we pious.
शतपवित्राः सवधया मदन्तीर्देवीर्देवानामपि यन्ति पाथः|	allpurifying joying in their nature to paths of gods the goddesses move onward.
ता इन्द्रस्य न मिनन्ति वरतानि सिन्धुभ्यो हव्यं घर्तवज्जुहोत|	they never violate the laws of indra present the oilrich offering to the rivers.
याः सूर्यो रश्मिभिराततान याभ्य इन्द्रो अरदद गातुमूर्मिम|	whom sūrya with his bright beams hath attracted and indra dug the path for them to travel.
ते सिन्धवो वरिवो धातना नो यूयं पात|	may these streams give us ample room and freedom preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
परति वां रथं नर्पती जरध्यै हविष्मता मनसा यज्ञियेन|	i with a holy heart that brings oblation will sing forth praise to meet your car ye princes.
यो वां दूतो न धिष्ण्यावजीगरछा सूनुर्न पितरा विवक्मि|	which muchdesired hath wakened as your envoy i call you hither as a son his parents.
अशोच्यग्निः समिधानो अस्मे उपो अद्र्श्रन तमसश्चिदन्ताः|	brightly hath agni shone by us enkindled the limits even of darkness were apparent.
अचेति केतुरुषसः पुरस्ताच्छ्रिये दिवो दुहितुर्जायमानः|	eastward is seen the banner of the morning the banner born to give heavens daughter glory.
अभि वां नूनमश्विना सुहोता सतोमैः सिषक्ति नासत्या विवक्वान|	with hymns the deft priest is about you aśvins the eloquent priest attends you now nāsatyas.
पूर्वीभिर्यातं पथ्याभिरर्वाक सवर्विदा वसुमता रथेन|	come by the paths that ye are wont to travel on car that finds the light laden with treasure.
अवोर्वां नूनमश्विना युवाकुर्हुवे यद वां सुते माध्वीवसूयुः|	when suppliant for your help lovers of sweetness i seeking wealth call you to our libation.
आ वां वहन्तु सथविरासो अश्वाः पिबाथो अस्मेसुषुता मधूनि|	hitherward let your vigorous horses bear you drink ye with us the wellpressed soma juices.
पराचीमु देवाश्विना धियं मेअम्र्ध्रां सातये कर्तं वसूयुम|	bring forward aśvins gods to its fulfilment my neverwearied prayer that asks for riches.
विश्वा अविष्टं वाज आ पुरन्धीस्ता नः शक्तं शचीपती शचीभिः|	vouchsafe us all high spirit in the combat and with your powers o lords of power assist us.
अविष्टं धीष्वश्विना न आसु परजावद रेतो अह्रयं नो अस्तु|	favour us in these prayers of ours o aśvins may we have genial vigour neer to fail us.
आ वां तोके तनये तूतुजानाः सुरत्नासो देववीतिंगमेम|	so may we strong in children and descendants go wealthy to the banquet that awaits you.
एष सय वां पूर्वगत्वेव सख्ये निधिर्हितो माध्वी रातो अस्मे|	lovers of sweetness we have brought this treasure to you as twere an envoy sent for friendship.
अहेळता मनसा यातमर्वागश्नन्ता हव्यं मानुषीषु विक्षु|	come unto us with spirits free from anger in homes of men enjoying our oblation.
एकस्मिन योगे भुरणा समाने परि वां सप्त सरवतो रथो गात|	with one the same intention ye swift movers oer the seven rivers hath your chariot travelled.
न वायन्ति सुभ्वो देवयुक्ता ये वां धूर्षु तरणयोवहन्ति|	yoked by the gods your strong steeds never weary while speeding forward at the pole they bear you.
असश्चता मघवद्भ्यो हि भूतं ये राया मघदेयं जुनन्ति|	exhaustless be your bounty to our princes who with their wealth incite the gift of riches.
पर ये बन्धुं सून्र्ताभिस्तिरन्ते गव्या पर्ञ्चन्तो अश्व्या मघानि|	who further friendship with their noble natures combining wealth in kine with wealth in herses.
नू मे हवमा शर्णुतं युवाना यासिष्टं वर्तिरश्विनाविरावत|	now hear o youthful twain mine invocation come aśvins to the home where food aboundeth.
धत्तं रत्नानि जरतं च सूरीन यूयं पात|	vouchsafe us wealth do honour to our nobles preserve us evermore ye gods with blessings.
धेनुः परत्नस्य काम्यं दुहानान्तः पुत्रश्चरति दक्षिणायाः|	the ancients milchcow yields the things we long for the son of dakṣiṇā travels between them.
आ दयोतनिं वहति शुभ्रयामोषस सतोमो अश्विनावजीगः|	she with the splendid chariot brings refulgence the praise of uṣas hath awoke the aśvins.
सुयुग वहन्ति परति वां रतेनोर्ध्वा भवन्ति पितरेव मेधाः|	they bear you hither by wellorderd statute our sacred offerings rise as if to parents.
जरेथामस्मद वि पणेर्महीषां युवोरवश्चक्र्मा यातमर्वाक|	destroy in us the counsel of the niggard come hitherward for we have shown you favour.
सुयुग्भिरश्वैः सुव्र्ता रथेन दस्राविमं शर्णुतं शलोकमद्रेः|	with lightlyrolling car and wellyoked horses hear this the pressstones song ye wonderworkers.
किमङग वां परत्यवर्तिं गमिष्ठाहुर्विप्रासो अश्विना पुराजाः|	have not the sages of old time ye aśvins called you most prompt to come and stay misfortune.
आ मन्येथामा गतं कच्चिदेवैर्विश्वे जनासो अश्विना हवन्ते|	remember us and come to us for ever men as their wont is invocate the aśvins.
इमा हि वां गोर्जीका मधूनि पर मित्रासो न ददुरुस्रो अग्रे|	friends as it were have offered you these juices sweet blent with milk at the first break of morning.
तिरः पुरू चिदश्विना रजांस्याङगूषो वां मघवाना जनेषु|	even through many regions o ye aśvins high praise is yours among mankind ye mighty.
एह यातं पथिभिर्देवयानैर्दस्राविमे वां निधयो मधूनाम|	come helpers on the paths which gods have travelled here your libations of sweet meath are ready.
पुराणमोकः सख्यं शिवं वां युवोर्नरा दरविणं जह्नाव्याम|	ancient your home auspicious is your friendship heroes your wealth is with the house of jahnu.
पुनः कर्ण्वानाः सख्या शिवानि मध्वा मदेमसह नू समानाः|	forming again with you auspicious friendship let us rejoice with draughts of meath together.
अश्विना वायुना युवं सुदक्षा नियुद्भिष च सजोषसा युवाना|	o aśvins very mighty ones with vāyu and with his steeds oneminded everyouthful.
नासत्या तिरोह्न्यं जुषाणा सोमं पिबतमस्रिधा सुदानू|	nāsatyas joying in the third days soma drink it not hostile very bounteous givers.
अश्विना परि वामिषः पुरूचीरीयुर्गीर्भिर्यतमाना अम्र्ध्राः|	aśvins to you are brought abundant viands in rivalry with sacred songs unceasing.
रथो ह वां रतजा अद्रिजूतः परि दयावाप्र्थिवी याति सद्यः|	sprung from high law your car urged on by pressstones goes round the earth and heaven in one brief moment.
अश्विना मधुषुत्तमो युवाकुः सोमस्तं पातमा गतं दुरोणे|	aśvins your soma sheds delicious sweetness drink ye thereof and come unto our dwelling.
रथो ह वां भूरि वर्पः करिक्रत सुतावतो निष्क्र्तमागमिष्ठः|	your car assuming many a shape most often goes to the somapressers place of meeting.
भवा नो अग्ने सुमना उपेतौ सखेव सख्ये पितरेव साधुः|	agni be kind to us when we approach thee good as a friend to friend as sire and mother.
पुरुद्रुहो हि कषितयो जनानां परति परतीचीर्दहतादरातीः|	the races of mankind are great oppressors burn up malignity that strives against us.
तपो शवग्ने अन्तरानमित्रान तपा शंसमररुषः परस्य|	agni burn up the unfriendly who are near us burn thou the foemans curse who pays no worship.
तपो वसो चिकितानो अचित्तान वि ते तिष्ठन्तामजरा अयासः|	burn vasu thou who markest well the foolish let thine eternal nimble beams surround thee.
इध्मेनाग्न इछमानो घर्तेन जुहोमि हव्यं तरसे बलाय|	with fuel agni and with oil desirous mine offering i present for strength and conquest.
यावदीशे बरह्मणा वन्दमान इमां धियं शतसेयाय देवीम|	with prayer so far as i have power adoringthis hymn divine to gain a hundred treasures.
उच्छोचिषा सहसस पुत्र सतुतो बर्हद वयः शशमानेषु धेहि|	give with thy glow thou son of strength when lauded great vital power to those who toil to serve thee.
रेवदग्ने विश्वामित्रेषु शं योर्मर्म्र्ज्मा ते तन्वं भूरि कर्त्वः|	give richly agni to the viśvāmitras in rest and stir oft have we decked thy body.
कर्धि रत्नं सुसनितर्धनानां स घेदग्ने भवसि यत समिद्धः|	give us o liberal lord great store of riches for agni such art thou when duly kindled.
सतोतुर्दुरोणे सुभगस्य रेवत सर्प्रा करस्ना दधिषे वपूंषि|	thou in the happy singers home bestowest amply with arms extended things of beauty.
पर पर्वतानामुशती उपस्थादश्वे इव विषिते हासमाने|	forth from the bosom of the mountains eager as two swift mares with loosened rein contending.
गावेव शुभ्रे मातरा रिहाणे विपाट छुतुद्री पयसाजवेते|	like two bright mother cows who lick their youngling vipāś and sutudri speed down their waters.
इन्द्रेषिते परसवं भिक्षमाणे अछा समुद्रं रथ्येव याथः|	impelled by indra whom ye pray to urge you ye move as twere on chariots to the ocean.
समाराणे ऊर्मिभिः पिन्वमाने अन्या वामन्यामप्येति शुभ्रे|	flowing together swelling with your billows o lucid streams each of you seeks the other.
अछा सिन्धुं मात्र्तमामयासं विपाशमुर्वीं सुभगामगन्म|	i have attained the most maternal river we have approached vipāś the broad the blessed.
वत्समिव मातरा संरिहाणे समानं योनिमनु संचरन्ती|	licking as twere their calf the pair of mothers flow onward to their common home together.
एन वयं पयसा पिन्वमाना अनु योनिं देवक्र्तं चरन्तीः|	we two who rise and swell with billowy waters move forward to the home which gods have made us.
न वर्तवे परसवः सर्गतक्तः किंयुर्विप्रो नद्यो जोहवीति|	our flood may not be stayed when urged to motion what would the singer calling to the rivers.
रमध्वं मे वचसे सोम्याय रतावरीरुप मुहूर्तमेवैः|	linger a little at my friendly bidding rest holy ones a moment in your journey.
पर सिन्धुमछा बर्हती मनीषावस्युरह्वे कुशिकस्य सूनुः|	with hymn sublime soliciting your favour kuśikas son hath called unto the river.
इन्द्रो अस्मानरदद वज्रबाहुरपाहन वर्त्रं परिधिं नदीनाम|	indra who wields the thunder dug our channels he smote down vṛtra him who stayed our currents.
देवोअनयत सवित सुपाणिस्तस्य वयं परसवे याम उर्वीः|	savitar god the lovelyhanded led us and at his sending forth we flow expanded.
परवाच्यं शश्वधा वीर्यं तदिन्द्रस्य कर्म यदहिंविव्र्श्चत|	that hero deed of indra must be lauded for ever that he rent ahi in pieces.
वि वज्रेण परिषदो जघानायन्नापोअयनमिछमानाः|	he smote away the obstructors with his thunder and eager for their course forth flowed the waters.
एतद वचो जरितर्मापि मर्ष्ठा आ यत ते घोषानुत्तरा युगानि|	never forget this word of thine o singer which future generations shall reecho.
उक्थेषु कारो परति नो जुषस्व मा नो नि कः पुरुषत्रा नमस्ते|	in hymns o bard show us thy loving kindness humble us not mid men to thee be honour.
ओ षु सवसारः कारवे शर्णोत ययौ वो दूरादनसा रथेन|	list quickly sisters to the bard who cometh to you from far away with car and wagon.
नि षू नमध्वं भवता सुपारा अधोक्षाः सिन्धवःस्रोत्याभिः|	bow lowly down be easy to be traversed stay rivers with your floods below our axles.
आ ते कारो शर्णवामा वचांसि ययाथ दूरादनसा रथेन|	yea we will listen to thy words o singer with wain and car from far away thou comest.
नि ते नंसै पीप्यानेव योषा मर्यायेव कन्या शश्वचै ते|	low like a nursing mother will i bend me and yield me as a maiden to her lover.
यदङग तवा भरताः सन्तरेयुर्गव्यन गराम इषित इन्द्रजूतः|	soon as the bharatas have fared across thee the warrior band urged on and sped by indra.
अर्षादह परसवः सर्गतक्त आ वो वर्णे सुमतिं यज्ञियानाम|	then let your streams flow on in rapid motion i crave your favour who deserve our worship.
अतारिषुर्भरता गव्यवः समभक्त विप्रः सुमतिं नदीनाम|	the warrior host the bharatas fared over the singer won the favour of the rivers.
पर पिन्वध्वमिषयन्तीः सुराधा आ वक्षणाः पर्णध्वं यात शीभम|	swell with your billows hasting pouring riches fill full your channels and roll swiftly onward.
उद व ऊर्मिः शम्या हन्त्वापो योक्त्राणि मुञ्चत|	so let your wave bear up the pins and ye o waters spare the thongs.
मादुष्क्र्तौ वयेनसाघ्न्यौ शूनमारताम|	and never may the pair of bulls harmless and sinless waste away.
आ तू न इन्द्र मद्र्यग घुवानः सोमपीतये|	invoked to drink the soma juice come with thy bay steeds thunderarmed.
हरिभ्यां याह्यद्रिवः|	come indra hitherward to me.
सत्तो होता न रत्वियस्तिस्तिरे बर्हिरानुषक|	our priest is seated true to time the grass is regularly strewn.
अयुज्रन परातरद्रयः|	the pressingstones were set at morn.
इमा बरह्म बरह्मवाहः करियन्त आ बर्हिः सीद|	these prayers o thou who hearest prayer are offered seat thee on the grass.
वीहि शूर पुरोळाशम|	hero enjoy the offered cake.
रारन्धि सवनेषु ण एषु सतोमेषु वर्त्रहन|	o vṛtraslayer be thou pleased with these libations with these hymns.
उक्थेष्विन्द्र गिर्वणः|	songloving indra with our lauds.
मतयः सोमपामुरुं रिहन्ति शवसस पतिम|	our hymns caress the lord of strength vast drinker of the somas juice.
इन्द्रं वत्सं न मातरः|	indra as mothercows their calf.
स मन्दस्वा हयन्धसो राधसे तन्वा महे|	delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own great munificence.
न सतोतारं निदे करः|	yield not thy singer to reproach.
वयमिन्द्र तवायवो हविष्मन्तो जरामहे|	we indra dearly loving thee bearing oblation sing thee hymns.
उत तवमस्मयुर्वसो|	thou vasu dearly lovest us.
मारे अस्मद वि मुमुचो हरिप्रियार्वां याहि|	o thou to whom thy bays are dear loose not thy horses far from us.
इन्द्र सवधावोमत्स्वेह|	here glad thee indra lord divine.
अर्वाञ्चं तवा सुखे रथे वहतामिन्द्र केशिना|	may longmaned coursers dropping oil bring thee on swift car hitherward.
घर्तस्नूबर्हिरासदे|	indra to seat thee on the grass.
अग्निमुषसमश्विना दधिक्रां वयुष्टिषु हवते वह्निरुक्थैः|	with lauds at break of morn the priest invoketh agni dawn dadhikrās and both the aśvins.
सुज्योतिषो नः शर्ण्वन्तु देवाः सजोषसो अध्वरं वावशानाः|	with one consent the gods whose light is splendid longing to taste our sacrifice shall hear us.
अग्ने तरी ते वाजिना तरी षधस्था तिस्रस्ते जिह्वा रतजात पूर्वीः|	three are thy powers o agni three thy stations three are thy tongues yea many child of order.
तिस्र उ ते तन्वो देववातास्ताभिर्नः पाहि गिरो अप्रयुछन|	three bodies hast thou which the gods delight in with these protect our hymns with care unceasing.
अग्ने भूरीणि तव जातवेदो देव सवधावोअम्र्तस्य नाम|	o agni many are the names thou bearest immortal god divine and jātavedas.
याश्च माया मायिनां विश्वमिन्व तवे पूर्वीः सन्दधुःप्र्ष्टबन्धो|	and many charms of charmers allinspirer have they laid in thee lord of true attendants.
अग्निर्नेता भग इव कषितीनां दैवीनां देव रतुपा रतावा|	agni like bhaga leads the godly people he who is true to law and guards the seasons.
स वर्त्रहा सनयो विश्ववेदाः पर्षद विश्वाति दुरिता गर्णन्तम|	ancient allknowing he the vṛtraslayer shall bear the singer safe through every trouble.
ददहिक्रामग्निमुषसं च देवीं बर्हस्पतिं सवितारं चदेवम|	i call on savitar the god on morning bṛhaspati and dadhikrās and agni.
अश्विना मित्रावरुणा भगं च वसून रुद्रानादित्यानिह हुवे|	on varuṇa and mitra on the aśvins bhaga the vasus rudras and Ādityas.
उप नः सुतमा गहि सोममिन्द्र गवाशिरम|	come to the juice that we have pressed to soma indra bleat with milk.
हरिभ्यां यस्ते अस्मयुः|	come favouring us thy baydrawn car.
तमिन्द्र मदमा गहि बर्हिष्ठां गरावभिः सुतम|	come indra to this gladdening drink placed on the grass pressed out with stones.
कुविन नवस्य तर्प्णवः|	wilt thou not drink thy fill thereof.
इन्द्रमित्था गिरो ममाछागुरिषिता इतः|	to indra have my songs of praise gone forth thus rapidly sent hence.
आव्र्ते सोमपीतये|	to turn him to the somadraught.
इन्द्रं सोमस्य पीतये सतोमैरिह हवामहे|	hither with songs of praise we call indra to drink the soma juice.
उक्थेभिः कुविदागमत|	will he not come to us by lauds.
इन्द्र सोमाः सुता इमे तान दधिष्व शतक्रतो|	indra these somas are expressed take them within thy belly lord.
जठरे वाजिनीवसो|	of hundred powers thou prince of wealth.
विद्मा हि तवा धनंजयं वाजेषु दध्र्षं कवे|	we know thee winner of the spoil and resolute in battles sage.
अधा तेसुम्नमीमहे|	therefore thy blessing we implore.
इममिन्द्र गवाशिरं यवाशिरं च नः पिब|	borne hither by thy stallions drink indra this juice which we have pressed.
आगत्या वर्षभिः सुतम|	mingled with barley and with milk.
तुभ्येदिन्द्र सव ओक्ये सोमं चोदामि पीतये|	indra for thee in thine own place i urge the soma for thy draught.
एष रारन्तु ते हर्दि|	deep in thy heart let it remain.
तवां सुतस्य पीतये परत्नमिन्द्र हवामहे|	we call on thee the ancient one indra to drink the soma juice.
कुशिकासो अवस्यवः|	we kuśikas who seek thine aid.
इहेह वो मनसा बन्धुता नर उशिजो जग्मुरभि तानि वेदसा|	here is your ghostly kinship here o men they came desirous to these holy rites with store of wealth.
याभिर्मायाभिः परतिजूतिवर्पसः सौधन्वना यज्ञियं भागमानश|	with wondrous arts whereby with schemes to meet each need ye gained sudhanvans sons your share in sacrifice.
याभिः शचीभिश्चमसानपिंशत यया धिया गामरिणीत चर्मणः|	the mighty powers wherewith ye formed the chalices the thought by which ye drew the cow from out the hide.
येन हरी मनसा निरतक्षत तेन देवत्वं रभवः समानश|	the intellect wherewith ye wrought the two bay steedsthrough these o Ṛbhus ye attained divinity.
इन्द्रस्य सख्यं रभवः समानशुर्मनोर्नपातो अपसो दधन्विरे|	friendship with indra have the Ṛbhus fully gained grandsons of manu they skilfully urged the work.
सौधन्वनासो अम्र्तत्वमेरिरे विष्ट्वी शमीभिः सुक्र्तः सुक्र्त्यया|	sudhanvans children won them everlasting life serving with holy rites pious with noble acts.
इन्द्रेण याथ सरथं सुते सचानथो वशानां भवथासह शरिया|	in company with indra come ye to the juice then gloriously shall your wishes be fulfilled.
न वः परतिमै सुक्र्तानि वाघतः सौधन्वना रभवो वीर्याणि च|	not to be paragoned ye priests are your good deeds nor your heroic acts Ṛbhus sudhanvans sons.
इन्द्र रभुभिर्वाजवद्भिः समुक्षितं सुतं सोममा वर्षस्वा गभस्त्योः|	o indra with the Ṛbhus mighty ones pour down the soma juice effused wellblent from both thy hands.
धियेषितो मघवन दाशुषो गर्हे सौधन्वनेभिः सह मत्स्वा नर्भिः|	maghalan urged by song in the drinkofferers house rejoice thee with the heroes with sudhanvans sons.
इन्द्र रभुमान वाजवान मत्स्वेह नोअस्मिन सवने शच्या पुरुष्टुत|	with Ṛbhu near and vāja indra here exult with saci praised of many in the juice we pour.
इमानि तुभ्यं सवसराणि येमिरे वरता देवानां मनुषश्च धर्मभिः|	these homes wherein we dwell have turned themselves to thee devotions to the gods as laws of men ordain.
इन्द्र रभुभिर्वाजिभिर्वाजयन्निह सतोमं जरितुरुप याहि यज्ञियम|	come with the mighty Ṛbhus indra come to us strengthening with thy help the singers holy praise.
शतं केतेभिरिषिरेभिरायवे सहस्रणीथोध्वरस्य होमनि|	at hundred eager calls come to the living man with thousand arts attend the act of sacrifice.
युध्मस्य ते वर्षभस्य सवराज उग्रस्य यून सथविरस्य घर्ष्वेः|	of thee the bull the warrior sovran ruler joyous and fierce ancient and ever youthful.
अजूर्यतो वज्रिणो वीर्याणीन्द्र शरुतस्य महतो महानि|	the undecaying one who wields the thunder renowned and great great are the exploits indra.
महानसि महिष वर्ष्ण्येभिर्धनस्प्र्दुग्र सहमानो अन्यान|	great art thou mighty lord through manly vigour o fierce one gathering spoil subduing others.
एको विश्वस्य भुवनस्य राजा स योधया च कषयया च जनान|	thyself alone the universes sovran so send forth men to combat and to rest them.
पर मात्राभी रिरिचे रोचमानः पर देवेभिर्विश्वतो अप्रतीतः|	he hath surpassed all measure in his brightness yea and the gods for none may be his equal.
पर मज्मना दिव इन्द्रः पर्थिव्याः परोरोर्महो अन्तरिक्षाद रजीषी|	impetuous indra in his might cxccedcth wide vast midair and heaven and earth together.
उरुं गभीरं जनुषाभ्युग्रं विश्वव्यचसमवतं मतीनाम|	to indra even as rivers to the ocean flow forth from days of old the soma juices.
इन्द्रं सोमासः परदिवि सुतासः समुद्रं न सरवता विशन्ति|	to him wide deep and mighty from his birthtime the well of holy thoughts ailcomprehending.
यं सोममिन्द्र पर्थिवीद्यावा गर्भं न माता बिभ्र्तस्त्वाया|	the soma indra which the earth and heaven bear for thee as a mother bears her infant.
तं ते हिन्वन्ति तमु ते मर्जन्त्यध्वर्यवो वर्षभ पातवा उ|	this they send forth to thee this vigorous hero adhvaryus purify for thee to drink of.
अग्ने जुषस्व नो हविः पुरोळाशं जातवेदः|	agni who knowest all accept our offering and the cake of meal.
परातःसावेधियावसो|	at dawns libation rich in prayer.
पुरोळा अग्ने पचतस्तुभ्यं वा घा परिष्क्र्तः|	agni the sacrificial cake hath been prepared and dressed for thee.
तं जुषस्व यविष्ठ्य|	accept it o most youthful god.
अग्ने वीहि पुरोळाषमाहुतं तिरोह्न्यम|	agni enjoy the cake of meal and our oblation three days old.
सहसः सूनुरस्यध्वरे हितः|	thou son of strength art stablished at our sacrifice.
माध्यन्दिने सवने जातवेदः पुरोळाशमिह कवे जुषस्व|	here at the midday sacrifice enjoy thou the sacrificial cake wise jātavedas.
अग्ने यह्वस्य तव भागधेयं न पर मिनन्ति विदथेषु धीराः|	agni the sages in assemblies never minish the portion due to thee the mighty.
अग्ने तर्तीये सवने हि कानिषः पुरोळाशं सहसः सूनवाहुतम|	o agni at the third libation takewith joy the offered cake of sacrifice thou son of strength.
अथा देवेष्वध्वरं विपन्यया धा रत्नवन्तमम्र्तेषु जाग्र्विम|	through skill in song bear to the gods our sacrifice watchful and fraught with riches to immortal god.
अग्ने वर्धान आहुतिं पुरोळाशं जातवेदः|	o waxing agni knower thou of all accept our gifts the cake.
जुषस्व तिरोह्न्यम|	and that prepared ere yesterday.
मित्रो जनान यातयति बरुवाणो मित्रो दाधार पर्थिवीमुत दयाम|	mitra when speaking stirreth men to labour mitra sustaineth both the earth and heaven.
मित्रः कर्ष्टीरनिमिषाभि चष्टे मित्राय हव्यंघ्र्तवज्जुहोत|	mitra beholdeth men with eyes that close not to mitra bring with holy oil oblation.
पर स मित्र मर्तो अस्तु परयस्वान यस्त आदित्य शिक्षति वरतेन|	foremost be he who brings thee food o mitra who strives to keep thy sacred law Āditya.
न हन्यते न जीयते तवोतो नैनमंहो अश्नोत्यन्तितो न दूरात|	he whom thou helpest neer is slain or conquered on him from near or far falls no affliction.
अनमीवास इळया मदन्तो मितज्ञवो वरिमन्ना पर्थिव्याः|	joying in sacred food and free from sickness with knees bent lowly on the earths broad surface.
आदित्यस्य वरतमुपक्षियन्तो वयं मित्रस्य सुमतौ सयाम|	following closely the Ādityas statute may we remain in mitras gracious favour.
अयं मित्रो नमस्यः सुशेवो राजा सुक्षत्रो अजनिष्ट वेधाः|	auspicious and adorable this mitra was born with fair dominion king disposer.
तस्य वयं|	may we enjoy the grace of him the holy yea rest in his propitious lovingkindness.
महानादित्यो नमसोपसद्यो यातयज्जनो गर्णते सुशेवः|	the great Āditya to be served with wor ship who stirreth men is gracious to the singer.
तस्मा एतत पन्यतमाय जुष्टमग्नौ मित्राय हविरा जुहोत|	to mitra him most highly to be lauded offer in fire oblation that he loveth.
मित्रस्य चर्षणीध्र्तोअवो देवस्य सानसि|	the gainful grace of mitra god supporter of the race of man.
दयुम्नं चित्रश्रवस्तमम|	gives splendour of mostglorious fame.
अभि यो महिना दिवं मित्रो बभूव सप्रथाः|	mitra whose glory spreads afar he who in might surpasses heaven.
अभि शरवोभिः पर्थिवीम|	surpasses earth in his renown.
मित्राय पञ्च येमिरे जना अभिष्टिशवसे|	all the five races have repaired to mitra ever strong to aid.
स देवान विश्वान बिभर्ति|	for he sustaineth all the gods.
मित्रो देवेष्वायुषु जनाय वर्क्तबर्हिषे|	mitra to gods to living men to him who strews the holy grass.
इष इष्टव्रताकः|	gives food fulfilling sacred law.
पर मे विविक्वानविदन मनीषां धेनुं चरन्तीं परयुतामगोपाम|	my thought with fine discernment hath discovered the cow who wanders free without a herdsman.
सद्यश्चिद या दुदुहे भूरि धासेरिन्द्रस्तदग्निः पनितारो अस्याः|	her who hath straightway poured me food in plenty indra and agni therefore are her praisers.
इन्द्रः सु पूषा वर्षणा सुहस्ता दिवो न परीताः शशयं दुदुह्रे|	indra and pūṣan deft of hand and mighty wellpleased have drained the heavens exhaustless udder.
विश्वे यदस्यां रणयन्त देवाः पर वोअत्र वसवः सुम्नमश्याम|	as in this praise the gods have all delighted may i win blessing here from you o vasus.
या जामयो वर्ष्ण इछन्ति शक्तिं नमस्यन्तीर्जानते गर्भमस्मिन|	fain to lend vigour to the bull the siste with reverence recognize the germ within him.
अछा पुत्रं धेनवो वावशाना महश्चरन्ति बिभ्रतं वपूंषि|	the cows come lowing hither to the youngling to him endued with great and wondrous beauties.
अछा विवक्मि रोदसी सुमेके गराव्णो युजानो अध्वरे मनीषा|	fixing with thought at sacrifice the pressstones i bid the wellformed heaven and earth come hither.
इमा उ ते मनवे भूरिवारा ऊर्ध्वा भवन्ति दर्शता यजत्राः|	for these thy flames which give men boons in plenty rise up on high the beautiful the holy.
या ते जिह्वा मधुमती सुमेधा अग्ने देवेषूच्यत उरूची|	agni thy meathsweet tongue that tastes fair viands which among gods is called the farextended.
तयेह विश्वानवसे यजत्राना सादय पायया चा मधूनि|	therewith make all the holy odes be seated here for our help and feed them with sweet juices.
या ते अग्ने पर्वतस्येव धारासश्चन्ती पीपयद देव चित्रा|	let thy stream give us drink o god o agni wonderful and exhaustless like the rainclouds.
तामस्मभ्यं परमतिं जातवेदो वसो रास्व सुमतिं विश्वजन्याम|	thus care for us o vasu jātavedas show us thy lovingkindness reaching all men.
अगने दिवः सूनुरसि परचेतास्तना पर्थिव्या उत विश्ववेदाः|	thou art the sapient son of dyaus o agni yes and the child of earth who knowest all things.
रधग देवानिह यजा चिकित्वः|	bring the gods specially thou sage for worship.
अग्निः सनोति वीर्याणि विद्वान सनोति वाजमम्र्ताय भूषन|	agni the wise bestows the might of heroes grants strengthening food preparing it for nectar.
स नो देवानेह वहा पुरुक्षो|	thou who art rich in food bring the gods hither.
अग्निर्द्यावाप्र्थिवी विश्वजन्ये आ भाति देवी अम्र्ते अमूरः|	agni infallible lights earth and heaven immortal goddesses gracious to all men.
कषयन वाजैः पुरुश्चन्द्रो नमोभिः|	lord through his strength splendid through adorations.
अग्न इन्द्रश्च दाशुषो दुरोने सुतावतो यज्ञमिहोप यातम|	come to the sacrifice agni and indra come to the offerers house who hath the soma.
अमर्धन्ता सोमपेयाय देवा|	come friendlyminded gods to drink the soma.
अग्ने अपां समिध्यसे दुरोणे नित्यः सूनो सहसो जातवेदः|	in the floods home art thou enkindled agni o jātavedas son of strength eternal.
सधस्थानि महयमान ऊती|	exalting with thine help the gatheringplaces.
वैश्वानराय पर्थुपाजसे विपो रत्ना विधन्त धरुणेषु गातवे|	to him who shines afar vaiśvānara shall bards give precious things that he may go on certain paths.
अग्निर्हि देवानम्र्तो दुवस्यत्यथा धर्माणि सनता न दूदुषत|	for agni the immortal serves the deities and therefore never breaks their everlasting laws.
अन्तर्दूतो रोदसी दस्म ईयते होता निषत्तो मनुषः पुरोहितः|	he wondrous envoy goes between the earth and heaven firm seated as the herald great high priest of men.
कषयं बर्हन्तं परि भूषति दयुभिर्देवेभिरग्निरिषितो धियावसुः|	he compassethwith rays the lofty dwellingplace agni sent forward by the gods enriched with piayer.
केतुं यज्ञानां विदथस्य सा धनं विप्रासो अग्निं महयन्त चित्तिभिः|	sages shall glorify agni with earnest thoughts ensign of sacrifice who fills the synod full.
अपांसि यस्मिन्नधि सन्दधुर्गिरस्तस्मिन सुम्नानि यजमान आ चके|	in whom the singers have stored up their holy acts to him the worshipper looks for joy and happiness.
पिता यज्ञानामसुरो विपश्चितां विमानमग्निर्वयुनं च वाघताम|	the sire of sacrifice great god of holy bards agni the measure and the symbol of the priests.
आ विवेश रोदसी भूरिवर्पसा पुरुप्रियो भन्दते धामभिः कविः|	hath entered heaven and earth that show in varied form the sage whom many love rejoiceth in his might.
चन्द्रमग्निं चन्द्ररथं हरिव्रतं वैश्वानरमप्सुषदं सवर्विदम|	bright agni with the bright car lord of green domains vaiśvānara dweller in the floods who finds the light.
विगाहं तूर्णिं तविषीभिराव्र्तं भूर्णिं देवास इह सुश्रियं दधुः|	pervading swift and wild encompassed round with powers him very glorious have the gods established here.
अग्निर्देवेभिर्मनुषश्च जन्तुभिस्तन्वानो यज्ञं पुरुपेशसं धिया|	agni together with the gods and manus folk by thought extending sacrifice in varied form.
रथीरन्तरीयते साधदिष्टिभिर्जीरो दमूना अभिशस्तिचातनः|	goes carborne to and fro with those who crown each rite the fleet the household friend who turns the curse aside.
अग्ने जरस्व सवपत्य आयुन्यूर्जा पिन्वस्व समिषो दिदीहि नः|	sing agni for long life to us and noble sons teem thou with plenty shine upon us store of food.
वयांसि जिन्व बर्हतश्च जाग्र्व उशिग देवानामसि सुक्रतुर्विपाम|	increase the great mans strength thou evervigilant thou longing for the gods knowest their hymns full well.
विश्पतिं यह्वमतिथिं नरः सदा यन्तारं धीनामुशिजं च वाघताम|	the mighty one lord of the people and their guest the leader of their thoughts devoted friend of priests.
अध्वराणां चेतनं जातवेदसं पर शंसन्ति नमसा जूतिभिर्व्र्धे|	our solemn rites announcer jātavedas men with worship ever praise with urgings for their weal.
विभावा देवः सुरणः परि कषितीरग्निर्बभूव शवसासुमद्रथः|	agni the god resplendent giver of great joy hath on his lovely car compassed the lands with might.
तस्य वरतानि भूरिपोषिणो वयमुप भूषेमदम आ सुव्र्क्तिभिः|	let us with pure laudations in his house approach the high laws of the nourisher of multitudes.
वैश्वानर तव धामान्या चके येभिः सवर्विदभवो विचक्षण|	i celebrate thy glories o vaiśvānara wherewith thou o farsighted god has found the light.
जात आप्र्णो भुवनानि रोदसी अग्ने ता विस्वा परिभूरसि तमना|	thou filledst at thy birth both worlds the earth and heaven all this o agni hast thou compassed of thyself.
वैश्वानरस्य दंसनाभ्यो बर्हदरिणादेकः सवपस्यया कविः|	by his great skill the sage alone hath brought to pass a great deed mightier than vaiśvānaras wondrous acts.
उभा पितरा महयन्नजायताग्निर्द्यावाप्र्थिवी भूरिरेतसा|	agni sprang into being magnifying both his parents heaven and earth rich in prolific seed.
उषो वाजेन वाजिनि परचेता सतोमं जुषस्व गर्णतो मघोनि|	o uṣas strong with strength endowed witli knowledge accept the singers praise o wealthy lady.
पुराणी देवि युवतिः पुरन्धिरनु वरतं चरसि विश्ववारे|	thou goddess ancient young and full of wisdom movest allbounteous as the law ordaineth.
उषो देव्यमर्त्या वि भाहि चन्द्ररथा सून्र्ता ईरयन्ती|	shine forth o morning thou auspicious goddess on thy bright car awaking pleasant voices.
आ तवा वहन्तु सुयमासो अश्वा हिरण्यवर्णां पर्थुपाजसो ये|	let docile horses of farreaching splendour convey thee hitherward the goldencoloured.
उषः परतीची भुवनानि विश्वोर्ध्वा तिष्ठस्यम्र्तस्य केतुः|	thou morning turning thee to every creature standest on high as ensign of the immortal.
समानमर्थं चरणीयमाना चक्रमिव नव्यस्या वव्र्त्स्व|	to one same goal ever and ever wending now like a wheel o newlyborn roll hi ther.
अव सयूमेव चिन्वती मघोन्युषा याति सवसरस्य पत्नी|	letting her reins drop downward morning cometh the wealthy dame the lady of the dwelling.
सवर्जनन्ती सुभगा सुदंसा आन्ताद दिवः पप्रथ आ पर्थिव्याः|	bringing forth light the wonderful the blessed hath spread her from the bounds of earth and heaven.
अछा वो देवीमुषसं विभातीं पर वो भरध्वं नमसा सुव्र्क्तिम|	hither invoke the radiant goddess morning and bring with reverence your hymn to praise her.
ऊर्ध्वं मधुधा दिवि पाजो अश्रेत पर रोचना रुरुचे रण्वसन्द्र्क|	she dropping sweets hath set in heaven her brightness and fair to look on hath beamed forth her splendour.
रतावरी दिवो अर्कैरबोध्या रेवती रोदसी चित्रमस्थात|	from heaven with hymns the holy one was wakened brightly to both worlds came the wealthy lady.
आयतीमग्न उषसं विभातीं वाममेषि दरविणं भिक्षमाणः|	to morning agni when she comes refulgent thou goest forth soliciting fair riches.
रतस्य बुध्न उषसामिषण्यन वर्षा मही रोदसी आ विवेश|	on laws firm base the speeder of the mornings the bull hath entered mighty earth and heaven.
मही मित्रस्य वरुणस्य माया चन्द्रेव भानुं वि दधे पुरुत्रा|	great is the power of varuṇa and mitra which bright hath spread in every place its splendour.
आ मन्द्रैरिन्द्र हरिभिर्याहि मयूररोमभिः|	come hither indra with bay steeds joyous with tails like peacocks plumes.
मा तवा केचिन नि यमन विं न पाशिनोअति धन्वेव तानिहि|	let no men cheek thy course as fowlers stay the bird pass oer them as oer desert lands.
वर्त्रखादो वलंरुजः पुरां दर्मो अपामजः|	he who slew vṛtra burst the cloud brake the strongholds and drave the floods.
सथाता रथस्य हर्योरभिस्वर इन्द्रो दर्ळ्हा चिदारुजः|	indra who mounts his chariot at his bay steeds cry shatters een things that stand most firm.
गम्भीरानुदधीन्रिव करतुं पुष्यसि गा इव|	like pools of water deep and full like kine thou cherishest thy might.
पर सुगोपायवसं धेनवो यथा हरदं कुल्या इवाशत|	like the milchcows that go wellguarded to the mead like waterbrooks that reach the lake.
आ नस्तुजं रयिं भरांशं न परतिजानते|	bring thou us wealth with power to strike our share gainst him who calls it his.
वर्क्षं पक्वं फलमङकीव धूनुहीन्द्र सम्पारणं वसु|	shake indra as with hooks the tree for ripened fruit for wealth to satisfy our wish.
सवयुरिन्द्र सवराळ असि समद्दिष्टिः सवयशस्तरः|	indra selfruling lord art thou good leader of most glorious fame.
स वाव्र्धान ओजसा पुरुष्टुत भवा नः सुश्रवस्तमः|	so waxen in thy strength o thou whom many praise be thou most swift to hear our call.
पर वो देवायाग्नये बर्हिष्ठमर्चास्मै|	to agni to this god of yours i sing aloud with utmost power.
गमद देवेभिरास नो यजिष्ठो बर्हिरा सदत|	may he come to us with the gods and sit best offerer on the grass.
रतावा यस्य रोदसी दक्षं सचन्त ऊतयः|	the holy whose are earth and heaven and succour waits upon his strength.
हविष्मन्तस्तमीळते तं सनिष्यन्तोअवसे|	him men who bring oblations laud and they who wish to gain for grace.
स यन्ता विप्र एषां स यज्ञानामथा हि षः|	he is the sage who guides these men leader of sacred rites is he.
अग्निं तं वो दुवस्यत दाता यो वनिता मघम|	him your own agni serve ye well who winneth and bestoweth wealth.
स नः शर्माणि वीतयेअग्निर्यछतु शन्तमा|	so may the gracious agni grant most goodly shelter for our use.
यतो नःप्रुष्णवद वसु दिवि कषितिभ्यो अप्स्वा|	whence in the heavens or in the floods he shall pour wealth upon our lands.
दीदिवांसमपूर्व्यं वस्वीभिरस्य धीतिभिः|	the singers kindle him the priest agni the lord of tribes of men.
रक्वाणो अग्निमिन्धते होतारं विश्पतिं विशाम|	resplendent and without a peer through his own excellent designs.
उत नो बरह्मन्नविष उक्थेषु देवहूतमः|	help us thou brahman best of all invokers of the gods in song.
शं नः शोचामरुद्व्र्धोअग्ने सहस्रसातमः|	beam friend of maruts bliss on us o agni a most liberal god.
नू नो रास्व सहस्रवत तोकवत पुष्टिमद वसु|	yea grant us treasure thousandfold with children and with nourishment.
दयुमदग्ने सुवीर्यं वर्षिष्थमनुपक्षितम|	and agni splendid hero strength exalted wasting not away.
चर्षणीध्र्तं मघवानमुक्थ्यमिन्द्रं गिरो बर्हतीरभ्यनूषत|	high hymns have sounded forth the praise of maghavan supporter of mankind of indra meet for lauds.
वाव्र्धानं पुरुहूतं सुव्र्क्तिभिरमर्त्यं जरमाणं दिवेदिवे|	him who hath waxen great invoked with beauteous songs immortal one whose praise each day is sung aloud.
शतक्रतुमर्णवं शाकिनं नरं गिरो म इन्द्रमुप यन्ति विश्वतः|	to indra from all sides go forth my songs of praise the lord of hundred powers strong hero like the sea.
वाजसनिं पूर्भिदं तूर्णिमप्तुरं धामसाचमभिषाचं सवर्विदम|	swift winner of the booty breakerdown of forts faithful and everglorious finder of the light.
आकरे वसोर्जरिता पनस्यतेअनेहस सतुभ इन्द्रो दुवस्यति|	where battles spoil is piled the singer winneth praise for indra taketh care of matchless worshippers.
विवस्वतः सदन आ हि पिप्रिये सत्रासाहमभिमातिहनं सतुहि|	he in vivasvāns dwelling findeth his delight praise thou the everconquering slayer of the foe.
नर्णामु तवा नर्तमं गीर्भिरुक्थैरभि पर वीरमर्चता सबाधः|	thee valorous most heroic of the heroes shall the priests glorify with songg and praises.
सं सहसे पुरुमायो जिहीते नमो अस्य परदिव एक ईशे|	full of all wondrous power he goes to conquest worship is his sole lord from days aforetime.
पूर्वीरस्य निष्षिधो मर्त्येषु पुरू वसूनि पर्थिवी बिभर्ति|	abundant are the gifts he gives to mortals for him the earth bears a rich store of treasures.
इन्द्राय दयाव ओषधीरुतापो रयिं रक्षन्ति जीरयो वनानि|	the heavens the growing plants the living waters the forest trees preserve their wealth for indra.
तुभ्यं बरह्माणि गिर इन्द्र तुभ्यं सत्रा दधिरे हरिवो जुषस्व|	to thee o indra lord of bays for ever are offered prayers and songs accept them gladly.
बोध्यापिरवसो नूतनस्य सखे वसो जरित्र्भ्यो वयोधाः|	as kinsman think thou of some fresh assistance good friend give strength and life to those who praise thee.
इन्द्र मरुत्व इह पाहि सोमं यथा शार्याते अपिबः सुतस्य|	here indra drink thou soma with the maruts as thou didst drink the juice beside Śāryāta.
तव परणीती तव शूर शर्मन्ना विवासन्ति कवयःसुयज्ञाः|	under thy guidance in thy keeping hero the singers serve skilled in fair sacrifices.
स वावशान इह पाहि सोमं मरुद्भिरिन्द्र सखिभिः सुतं नः|	so eagerly desirous drink the soma our juice o indra with thy friends the maruts.
जातं यत तवा परि देवा अभूषन महे भराय पुरुहूत विश्वे|	since at thy birth all deities adorned thee for the great fight o thou invoked of many.
अप्तूर्ये मरुत आपिरेषोअमन्दन्निन्द्रमनु दातिवाराः|	he was your comrade in your zeal o maruts they rich in noble gifts rejoiced in indra.
तेभिः साकं पिबतु वर्त्रखादः सुतं सोमं दाशुषः सवे सधस्थे|	with them together let the vṛtraslayer drink in his home the worshippers libation.
इदं हयन्वोजसा सुतं राधानां पते|	so lord of affluent gifts this juice hath been pressed for thee with strength.
पिबा तवस्य गिर्वणः|	drink of it thou who lovest song.
यस्ते अनु सवधामसत सुते नि यछ तन्वम|	incline thy body to this juice which suits thy godlike nature well.
स तवा ममत्तु सोम्यम|	may it cheer thee who lovest it.
पर ते अश्नोतु कुक्ष्योः परेन्द्र बरह्मणा शिरः|	brave indra let it work through both thy flanks and through thy head by prayer.
पर बाहू शूर राधसे|	and through thine arms to prosper us.
वार्त्रहत्याय शवसे पर्तनाषाह्याय च|	o indra for the strength that slays vṛtra and conquers in the fight.
इन्द्र तवा वर्तयामसि|	we turn thee hitherward to us.
अर्वाचीनं सु ते मन उत चक्षुः शतक्रतो|	o indra lord of hundred powers may those who praise thee hitherward.
इन्द्र कर्ण्वन्तु वाघतः|	direct thy spirit and thine eye.
नामानि ते शतक्रतो विश्वाभिर्गीर्भिरीमहे|	o indra lord of hundred powers with all our songs we invocate.
इन्द्राभिमातिषाह्ये|	thy names for triumph over foes.
पुरुष्टुतस्य धामभिः शतेन महयामसि|	we strive for glory through the powers immense of him whom many praise.
इन्द्रस्य चर्षणीध्र्तः|	of indra who supports mankind.
इन्द्रं वर्त्राय हन्तवे पुरुहूतमुप बरुवे|	for vṛtras slaughter i address indra whom many invocate.
भरेषु वाजसातये|	to win us booty in the wars.
वाजेषु सासहिर्भव तवामीमहे शतक्रतो|	in battles be victorious we seek thee lord of hundred powers.
इन्द्र वर्त्रायहन्तवे|	indra that vṛtra may be slain.
दयुम्नेषु पर्तनाज्ये पर्त्सुतूर्षु शरवस्सु च|	in splendid combats of the hosts in glories where the fight is won.
इन्द्र साक्ष्वाभिमातिषु|	indra be victor over foes.
शुष्मिन्तमं न ऊतये दयुम्निनं पाहि जाग्र्विम|	drink thou the soma for our help bright vigilant exceeding strong.
इन्द्र सोमंशतक्रतो|	o indra lord of hundred powers.
इन्द्रियाणि शतक्रतो या ते जनेषु पञ्चसु|	o Śatakratu powers which thou mid the five races hast displayed.
इन्द्र तानि ता वर्णे|	these indra do i claim of thee.
अगन्निन्द्र शरवो बर्हद दयुम्नं दधिष्व दुष्टरम|	indra great glory hast thou gained win splendid fame which none may mar.
उत ते शुष्मं तिरामसि|	we make thy might perpetual.
अर्वावतो न आ गह्यथो शक्र परावतः|	come to us either from anear or Śakra come from far away.
उ लोको यस्ते अद्रिव इन्द्रेह तत आ गहि|	indra wherever be thy home come to us thence o thunderarmed.
सोमस्य मा तवसं वक्ष्यग्ने वह्निं चकर्थ विदथे यजध्यै|	thou agni who wilt have the strong hast made me the somas priest to worship in assembly.
देवानछा दीद्यद युञ्जे अद्रिं शमाये अग्ने तन्वंजुषस्व|	thou shinest to the gods i set the pressstones i toil be joyful in thyself o agni.
पराञ्चं यज्ञं चक्र्म वर्धतां गीः समिद्भिरग्निं नमसा दुवस्यन|	east have we turned the rite may the hymn aid it with wood and worship shall they honour agni.
दिवः शशासुर्विदथा कवीनां गर्त्साय चित तवसे गातुमीषुः|	from heaven the synods of the wise have learnt it een for the quick and strong they seek advancement.
मयो दधे मेधिरः पूतदक्षो दिवः सुबन्धुर्जनुषा पर्थिव्याः|	the prudent he whose will is pure brought welfare allied by birth to heaven and earth in kinship.
अविन्दन्नु दर्शतमप्स्वन्तर्देवासो अग्निमपसि सवसॄणाम|	the gods discovered in the midst of waters beautiful agni with the sisters labour.
अवर्धयन सुभगं सप्त यह्वीः शवेतं जज्ञानमरुषम्महित्वा|	him blessed one the seven strong floods augmented him white at birth and red when waxen mighty.
शिशुं न जातमभ्यारुरश्वा देवासो अग्निंजनिमन वपुष्यन|	as mother mares run to their newborn you ling so at his birth the gods wondered at agni.
शुक्रेभिरङगै रज आततन्वान करतुं पुनानः कविभिः पवित्रैः|	spreading with radiant limbs throughout the region purging his power with wise purifications.
शोचिर्वसानः पर्यायुरपां शरियो मिमीते बर्हतीरनूनाः|	robing himself in light the life of waters he spreads abroad his high and perfect glories.
वव्राजा सीमनदतीरदब्धा दिवो यह्वीरवसाना अनग्नाः|	he sought heavens mighty ones the unconsuming the unimpaired not clothed and yet not naked.
सना अत्र युवतयः सयोनीरेकं गर्भं दधिरे सप्त वाणीः|	then they ancient and young who dwell together seven sounding rivers as one germ received him.
सतीर्णा अस्य संहतो विश्वरूपा घर्तस्य योनौ सरवथे मधूनाम|	his piles assuming every form are scattered where flow sweet waters at the spring of fatness.
अस्थुरत्र धेनवः पिन्वमाना मही दस्मस्य मातरा समीची|	there stood the milchkine with fullladen udders and both paired mighty mothers of the wondrous.
बभ्राणः सूनो सहसो वयद्यौद दाधानः शुक्रा रभसा वपूंषि|	carefully cherished son of strength thou shoncst assuming lasting and refulgent beauties.
शचोतन्ति धारा मधुनो घर्तस्य वर्षा यत्र वाव्र्धे काव्येन|	full streams of fatness and sweet juice descended there where the mighty one grew strong by wisdom.
पितुश्चिदूधर्जनुषा विवेद वयस्य धारा अस्र्जद वि धेनाः|	from birth he knew even his fathers bosom he set his voices and his streams in motion.
गुहा चरन्तं सखिभिः शिवेभिर्दिवो यह्वीभिर्नगुहा बभूव|	knew him who moved with blessed friends in secret with the young dames of heaven he stayed not hidden.
पितुश्च गर्भं जनितुश्च बभ्रे पूर्वीरेको अधयत पीप्यानाः|	he nursed the infant of the sire and maker alone the babe sucked many a teeming bosom.
वर्ष्णे सपत्नी शुचये सबन्धू उभे अस्मै मनुष्येनि पाहि|	guard for the bright and strong the fellowspouses friendly to men and bound to him in kinship.
उरौ महाननिबाधे ववर्धापो अग्निं यशसः सं हि पूर्वीः|	the mighty one increased in space unbounded full many a glorious flood gave strength to agni.
रतस्य योनावशयद दमूना जामीनामग्निरपसिस्वसॄणाम|	friend of the house within the lap of order lay agni in the sister rivers service.
अक्रो न बभ्रिः समिथे महीनां दिद्र्क्षेयः सूनवे भार्जीकः|	as keen supporter where great waters gather lightshedder whom the brood rejoice to look on.
उदुस्रिया जनिता यो जजानापां गर्भो नर्तमो यह्वो अग्निः|	he who begat and will beget the dawnlights most manly child of floods is youthful agni.
अपां गर्भं दर्शतमोषधीनां वना जजान सुभगा विरूपम|	him varied in his form the lovely infant of floods and plants the blessed wood hath gendered.
देवासश्चिन मनसा सं हि जग्मुः पनिष्ठं जातं तवसं दुवस्यन|	gods even moved in spirit came around him and served him at his birth the strong the wondrous.
बर्हन्त इद भानवो भार्जीकमग्निं सचन्त विद्युतो न शुक्राः|	like brilliant lightnings mighty luminaries accompany the lightdiffusing agni.
गुहेव वर्द्धं सदसि सवे अन्तरपार ऊर्वे अम्र्तन्दुहानाः|	waxen as twere in secret in his dwelling while in the boundless stall they milk out amṛta.
ईळे च तवा यजमानो हविर्भिरीळे सखित्वं सुमतिं निकामः|	i sacrificing serve thee with oblations and crave with longing thy goodwill and friendship.
देवैरवो मिमीहि सं जरित्रे रक्षा च नो दम्येभिरनीकैः|	grant with the gods thy grace to him who lauds thee protect us with thy rays that guard the homestead.
उपक्षेतारस्तव सुप्रणीतेअग्ने विश्वानि धन्या दधानाः|	may we o agni thou who leadest wisely thy followers and masters of all treasures.
सुरेतसा शरवसा तुञ्जमाना अभि षयाम पर्तनायून्रदेवान|	strong in the glory of our noble offspring subdue the godless when they seek the battle.
आ देवानामभवः केतुरग्ने मन्द्रो विश्वानि काव्यानि विद्वान|	ensign of gods hast thou become o agni joygiver knower of all secret wisdom.
परति मर्तानवासयो दमूना अनु देवान रथिरो यासिसाधन|	friend of the homestead thou hast lightened mortals carborne thou goest to the gods fulfilling.
नि दुरोणे अम्र्तो मर्त्यानां राजा ससाद विदथानि साधन|	within the house hath sate the king immortal of mortals filling full their sacred synods.
घर्तप्रतीक उर्विया वयद्यौदग्निर्विश्वानि काव्यानि विद्वान|	bedewed with holy oil he shineth widely agni the knower of all secret wisdom.
आ नो गहि सख्येभिः शिवेभिर्महान महीभिरूतिभिः सरण्यन|	come unto us with thine auspicious friendship come speeding mighty with thy mighty succours.
अस्मे रयिं बहुलं सन्तरुत्रं सुवाचं भागं यशसं कर्धी नः|	grant us abundant wealth that saves from danger that brings a good repute a glorious portion.
एता ते अग्ने जनिमा सनानि पर पूर्व्याय नूतनानि वोचम|	to thee who art of old these songs o agni have i declared the ancient and the later.
महान्ति वर्ष्णे सवना कर्तेमा जन्मञजन्मन निहितो जातवेदाः|	these great libations to the strong are offiered in every birth is jātavedas stablished.
जन्मञजन्मन निहितो जातवेदा विश्वामित्रेभिरिध्यते अजस्रः|	stablished in every birth is jātavedas kindled perpetual by the viśvāmitras.
तस्य वयं सुमतौ यज्ञियस्यापि भद्रे सौमनसे सयाम|	may we rest ever in the lovingkindness in the auspicious grace of him the holy.
इमं यज्ञं सहसावन तवं नो देवत्रा धेहि सुक्रतो रराणः|	this sacrifice of ours do thou o mighty o truly wise bear to the gods rejoicing.
पर यंसि होतर्ब्र्हतीरिषो नोअग्ने महि दरविनमा यजस्व|	grant us abundant food thou priestly herald vouchsafe to give us ample wealth o agni.
इळामग्ने पुरुदंसं सनिं गोः शश्वत्तमं हवमानायसाध|	as holy food agni to thineinvoker give wealth in cattle lasting rich in marvels.
सयान नः सूनुस्तनयो विजावाग्ने सा ते सुमतिर्भुत्वस्मे|	to us he born a son and spreading offspring agni be this thy gracious will to usward.
अग्निर्होता पुरोहितोअध्वरस्य विचर्षणिः|	agni is priest the great high priest of sacrifice most swift in act.
स वेद यज्ञमानुषक|	he knows the rite in constant course.
स हव्यवाळ अमर्त्य उशिग दूतस चनोहितः|	oblationbearer deathless well inclined an eager messenger.
अग्निर्धिया सं रण्वति|	agni comes nigh us with the thought.
अग्निर्धिया स चेतति केतुर्यज्ञस्य पूर्व्यः|	ensign of sacrifice from of old agni well knoweth with his thought.
अर्थं हयस्य तरणि|	to prosper this mans aim and hope.
अग्निं सूनुं सनश्रुतं सहसो जातवेदसम|	agni illustrious from old time the son of strength who knows all life.
वह्निं देवाक्र्ण्वत|	the gods have made to their priest.
अदाभ्यः पुरेता विशामग्निर्मानुषीणाम|	infallible is agni he who goes before the tribes of men.
तूर्णी रथः सदा नवः|	a chariot swift and ever new.
साह्वान विश्वा अभियुजः करतुर्देवानामम्र्क्तः|	strength of the gods which none may harm subduing all his enemies.
अग्निस्तुविश्रवस्तमः|	agni is mightiest in fame.
अभि परयांसि वाहसा दाश्वानश्नोति मर्त्यः|	by offering sacred food to him the mortal worshipper obtains.
कषयं पावकशोचिषः|	a home from him whose light makes pure.
परि विश्वानि सुधिताग्नेरश्याम मन्मभिः|	from agni by our hymns may we gain all things that bring happiness.
विप्रासो जातवेदसः|	singers of him who knows all life.
अग्ने विश्वानि वार्या वाजेषु सनिषामहे|	o agni in our deeds of might may we obtain all precious things.
तवे देवास एरिरे|	tle gods are centred all in thee.
इमं नो यज्ञमम्र्तेषु धेहीमा हव्या जातवेदो जुषस्व|	set this our sacrifice among the immortals be pleased with these our presents jātavedas.
सतोकानामग्ने मेदसो घर्तस्य होतः पराशान परथमो निषद्य|	o priest o agni sit thee down before us and first enjoy the drops of oil and fatness.
घर्तवन्तः पावक ते सतोका शचोतन्ति मेदसः|	for thee o purifier flow the drops of fatness rich in oil.
सवधर्मन देववीतये शरेष्ठं नो धेहि वार्यम|	after thy wont vouchsafe to us the choicest boon that gods may feast.
तुभ्यं सतोका घर्तश्चुतोअग्ने विप्राय सन्त्य|	agni most excellent for thee the sage are drops that drip with oil.
रषिः शरेष्ठः समिध्यसे यज्ञस्य पराविता भव|	thou art enkindled as the best of seers help thou the sacrifice.
तुभ्यं शचोतन्त्यध्रिगो शचीव सतोकासो अग्ने मेदसो घर्तस्य|	to thee o agni mighty and resistless to thee stream forth the drops of oil and fatness.
कविशस्तो बर्हता भानुनागा हव्या जुषस्व मेधिर|	with great light art thou come o praised by poets accept our offering o thou sage.
ओजिष्ठं ते मध्यतो मेद उद्भ्र्तं पर ते वयं ददामहे|	fatness exceeding rich extracted from the midstthis as our gift we offer thee.
शचोतन्ति ते वसो सतोका अधि तवचि परति तान देवशो विहि|	excellent god the drops run down upon thy skin deal them to each among the gods.
आ होता मन्द्रो विदथान्यस्थात सत्यो यज्वा कवितमः सवेधाः|	the pleasant priest is come into the synod true skilled in sacrifice most wise ordainer.
विद्युद्रथः सहसस पुत्रो अग्निः शोचिष्केशः पर्थिव्यां पाजो अश्रेत|	agni the son of strength whose car is lightning whose hair is flame hath shown on earth his lustre.
अयामि ते नमौक्तिं जुषस्व रतावस्तुभ्यं चेतते सहस्वः|	to thee i offer reverent speech accept it to thee who markest it victorious faithful.
विद्वाना वक्षि विदुषो नि षत्सि मध्य आ बर्हिरूतये यजत्र|	bring thou who knowest those who know and seat thee amid the sacred grass for help o holy.
दरवतां त उषसा वाजयन्ती अग्ने वातस्य पथ्याभिरछ|	the two who show their vigour night and morning by the winds paths shall haste to thee o agni.
यत सीमञ्जन्ति पूर्व्यं हविर्भिरा वन्धुरेव तस्थतुर्दुरोणे|	when men adorn the ancient with oblations these seek as on two chariotseats the dwelling.
मित्रश्च तुभ्यं वरुणः सहस्वोअग्ने विश्वे मरुतः सुम्नमर्चन|	to thee strong agni varuṇa and mitra and all the maruts sang a song of triumph.
यच्छोचिषा सहसस पुत्र तिष्ठा अभि कषितीः परथयन सूर्यो नॄन|	what time unto the peoples lands thou camest spreading them as the sun of men with lustre.
वयं ते अद्य ररिमा हि काममुत्तानहस्ता नमसोपसद्य|	approaching with raised hands and adoration we have this day fulfilled for thee thy longing.
यजिष्ठेन मनसा यक्षि देवानस्रेधता मन्मना विप्रो अग्ने|	worship the gods with most devoted spirit a priest with no unfriendly thought o agni.
तवद धि पुत्र सहसो वि पूर्वीर्देवस्य यन्त्यूतयो वि वाजाः|	for son of strength from thee come many succours and powers abundant that a god possesses.
तवं देहि सहस्रिणं रयिं नोअद्रोघेण वचसा सत्यमग्ने|	agni to us with speech that hath no falsehood grant riches real to be told in thousands.
तुभ्यं दक्ष कविक्रतो यानीमा देव मर्तासो अध्वरे अकर्म|	whatever god in sacrifice we mortals have wrought is all for thee strong wise of purpose.
तवं विश्वस्य सुरथस्य बोधि सर्वं तदग्ने अम्र्त सवदेह|	be thou the friend of each good chariots master all this enjoy thou here immortal agni.
अञ्जन्ति तवामध्वरे देवयन्तो वनस्पते मधुना दैव्येन|	godserving men o sovran of the forest with heavenly meath at sacrifice anoint thee.
यदूर्ध्वस्तिष्ठा दरविणेह धत्ताद यद वा कषयो मातुरस्या उपस्थे|	grant wealth to us when thou art standing upright as when reposing on this mothers bosom.
समिद्धस्य शरयमाणः पुरस्ताद बरह्म वन्वानो अजरं सुवीरम|	set up to eastward of the fire enkindled accepting prayer that wastes not rich in hero.
आरे अस्मदमतिं बाधमान उच्छ्रयस्व महते सौभगाय|	driving far from us poverty and famine lift thyself up to bring us great good fortune.
उच्छ्रयस्व वनस्पते वर्ष्मन पर्थिव्या अधि|	lord of the forest raise thyself up on the loftiest spot of earth.
सुमिती मीयमानो वर्चो धा यज्ञवाहसे|	give splendour fixt and measured well to him who brings the sacrifice.
युवा सुवासाः परिवीत आगात स उ शरेयान भवति जायमानः|	wellrobed enveloped he is come the youthful springing to life his glory waxeth greater.
तं धीरासः कवय उन नयन्ति सवाध्यो मनसा देवयन्तः|	contemplative in mind and godadoring sages of high intelligence upraise him.
जातो जायते सुदिनत्वे अह्नां समर्य आ विदथे वर्धमानः|	sprung up he rises in the days fair weather increasing in the menfrequented synod.
पुनन्ति धीरा अपसो मनीषा देवया विप्र उदियर्ति वाचम|	with song the wise and skilful consecrate him his voice the godadoring singer utters.
यान वो नरो देवयन्तो निमिम्युर्वनस्पते सवधितिर्वा ततक्ष|	ye whom religious men have firmly planted thou forest sovran whom the axe hath fashioned.
ते देवासः सवरवस्तस्थिवांसः परजावदस्मे दिधिषन्तु रत्नम|	let those the stakes divine which here are standing be fain to grant us wealth with store of children.
ये वर्क्णासो अधि कषमि निमितासो यतस्रुचः|	o men who lift the ladles up these hewn and planted in the ground.
ते नो वयन्तु वार्यं देवत्रा कषेत्रसाधसः|	bringing a blessing to the field shall bear our precious gift to gods.
आदित्या रुद्रा वसवः सुनीथा दयावाक्षामा पर्थिवी अन्तरिक्षम|	Ādityas rudras vasus careful leaders earth heaven and prthivi and airs midregion.
सजोषसो यज्ञमवन्तु देवा ऊर्ध्वं कर्ण्वन्त्वध्वरस्य केतुम|	accordant deities shall bless our worship and make our sacrifices ensign lofty.
हंसा इव शरेणिशो यतानाः शुक्रा वसानाः सवरवो नागुः|	like swans that flee in lengthened line the pillars have come to us arrayed in brilliant coiour.
उन्नीयमानाः कविभिः पुरस्ताद देवा देवानामपि यन्ति पाथः|	they lifted up on high by sages eastward go forth as gods to the gods dwellingplaces.
शर्ङगाणीवेच्छ्र्ङगिणां सं दद्र्श्रे चषालवन्तः सवरवः पर्थिव्याम|	those stakes upon the earth with rings that deck them seem to the eye like horns of horned creatures.
वाघद्भिर्वा विहवे शरोषमाणा अस्मानवन्तु पर्तनाज्येषु|	or as upraised by priests in invocation let them assist us in the rush to battle.
वनस्पते शतवल्शो वि रोह सहस्रवल्शा वि वयं रुहेम|	lord of the wood rise with a hundred branches with thousand branches may we rise to greatness.
यं तवामयं सवधितिस्तेजमानः परणिनाय महते सौभगाय|	tlou whom this hatchct with an edge well whetted for great felicity hath brought before us.
इमं महे विदथ्याय शूषं शश्वत कर्त्व ईड्यय पर जभ्रुः|	to him adorable mighty meet for synods this strengthening hymn unceasing have they offered.
शर्णोतु नो दम्येभिरनीकैः शर्णोत्वग्निर्दिव्यैरजस्रः|	may agni hear us with his homely splendours hear us eternal one with heavenly lustre.
महि महे दिवे अर्चा पर्थिव्यै कामो म इछञ्चरति परजानन|	to mighty heaven and earth i sing forth loudly my wish goes out desirous and well knowing.
ययोर्ह सतोमे विदथेषु देवाः सपर्यवो मादयन्ते सचायोः|	both at whose laud in synods showing favour the gods rejoice them with the living mortal.
युवोर्र्तं रोदसी सत्यमस्तु महे षु णः सुविताय पर भूतम|	o heaven and earth may your great law he faithful he ye our leaders for our high advantage.
इदं दिवे नमो अग्ने पर्थिव्यै सपर्यामि परयसा यामि रत्नम|	to heaven and earth i offer this my homage with food o agni as i pray for riches.
उतो हि वां पूर्व्या आविविद्र रतावरी रोदसी सत्यवाचः|	yea holy heaven and earth the ancient sages whose word was ever true had power to find you.
नरश्चिद वां समिथे शूरसातौ ववन्दिरे पर्थिवि वेविदानाः|	and brave men in the fightwhere heroes conquer o earth have known you well and paid you honour.
को अद्धा वेद क इह पर वोचद देवानछा पथ्या का समेति|	what pathway leadeth to the gods who knoweth this of a truth and who will now declare it.
दद्र्श्र एषामवमा सदांसि परेषु या गुह्येषु वरतेषु|	seen are their lowest dwellingplaces only but they are in remote and secret regions.
कविर्न्र्चक्षा अभि षीमचष्ट रतस्य योना विघ्र्ते मदन्ती|	the sage who looketh on mankind hath viewed them bedewed rejoicing in the seat of order.
नाना चक्राते सदनं यथा वः समानेन करतुना संविदाने|	they make a home as for a bird though parted with one same will finding themselves together.
समान्या वियुते दूरेन्ते धरुवे पदे तस्थतुर्जागरूके|	partners though parted with fardistant limits on one firm place both stand for ever watchful.
उत सवसारा युवती भवन्ती आदु बरुवाते मिथुनानि नाम|	and being young for evermore as sisters speak to each other names that are united.
विश्वेदेते जनिमा सं विविक्तो महो देवान बिभ्रती न वयथेते|	all living things they part and keep asunder though bearing up the mighty gods they reel not.
एजद धरुवं पत्यते विश्वमेकं चरत पतत्रि विषुणं वि जातम|	one all is lord of what is fixed and moving that walks that flies this multiform creation.
सना पुराणमध्येम्यारान महः पितुर्जनितुर्जामि तन नः|	afar the ancient from of old i ponder our kinship with our mighty sire and father.
देवासो यत्र पनितार एवैरुरौ पथि वयुते तस्थुरन्तः|	singing the praise whereof the gods by custom stand on the spacious farextended pathway.
इमं सतोमं रोदसी पर बरवीम्य रदूदराः शर्णवन्नग्निजिह्वाः|	this laud o heaven and earth to you i utter let the kindhearted hear whose tongue is agni.
मित्रः सम्राजो वरुणो युवान आदित्यासः कवयः पप्रथानाः|	young sovran rulers varuṇa and mitra the wise and very glorious Ādityas.
हिरण्यपाणिः सविता सुजिह्वस्त्रिरा दिवो विदथे पत्यमानः|	the fairtongued savitar the goldenhanded comes thrice from heaven as lord in our assembly.
देवेषु च सवितः शलोकमश्रेरादस्मभ्यमा सुवसर्वतातिम|	bear to the gods this song of praise and send us then savitar complete and perfect safety.
सुक्र्त सुपाणिः सववान रतावा देवस्त्वष्टावसे तानि नोधात|	deft worker skifulhanded helpful holy may tvaṣṭar god give us these things to aid us.
पूषण्वन्त रभवो मादयध्वमूर्ध्वग्रावाणो अध्वरमतष्ट|	take your delight ye Ṛbhus joined with pūṣan ye have prepared the rite with stones adjusted.
विद्युद्रथा मरुत रष्टिमन्तो दिवो मर्या रतजाता अयासः|	borne on their flashing car the speararmed maruts the nimble youths of heaven the sons of order.
सरस्वती शर्णवन यज्ञियासो धाता रयिं सहवीरं तुरासः|	the holy and sarasvatī shall hear us ye mighty give us wealth with noble offspring.
विष्णुं सतोमासः पुरुदस्ममर्का भगस्येव कारिणो यामनि गमन|	to viṣṇu rich in marvels songs and praises shall go as singers on the road of bhaga.
उरुक्रमः ककुहो यस्य पूर्विर्न मर्धन्ति युवतयोजनित्रीः|	the chieftain of the mighty stride whose mothers the many young dames never disregard him.
इन्द्रो विश्वैर्वीर्यैः पत्यमान उभे आ पप्रौ रोदसी महित्वा|	indra who rules through all his powers heroic hath with his majesty filled earth and heaven.
पुरन्दरो वर्त्रहा धर्ष्णुषेणः संग्र्भ्या न आ भरा भूरि पश्वः|	lord of brave hosts fortcrusher vṛtraslayer gather thou up and bring us store of cattle.
नासत्या मे पितरा बन्धुप्र्छा सजात्यमश्विनोश्चारु नाम|	my sires are the nāsatyas kind tokinsmen the aśvins kinship is a glorious title.
युवं हि सथो रयिदौ नो रयीणां दात्रं रक्षेथे अकवैरदब्धा|	for ye are they who give us store of riches ye guard your gift uncheated by the bounteous.
महत तद वः कवयश्चारु नाम यद ध देव भवथ विश्व इन्द्रे|	this is ye wise your great and glorious title that all ye deities abide in indra.
सख रभुभिः पुरुहूत परियेभिरिमां धियं सातये तक्षता नः|	friend muchinvoked art thou with thy dear Ṛbhus fashion ye this our hymn for our advantage.
अर्यमा णो अदितिर्यज्ञियासोअदब्धानि वरुणस्य वरतानि|	aryaman aditi deserve our worship the laws of varuṇa remain unbroken.
युयोत नो अनपत्यानि गन्तोः परजावान नः पशुमानस्तु गातुः|	the lot of childlessness remove ye from us and let our course be rich in kine and offspring.
देवानां दूतः पुरुध परसूतोअनागान नो वोचतु सर्वताता|	may the gods envoy sent to many a quarter proclaim us sinless for our perfect safety.
शर्णोतु नः पर्थिवी दयौरुतापः सूर्यो नक्षत्रैरुर्वन्तरिक्षम|	may earth and heaven the sun the waters hear us and the wide firmament and constellations.
शर्ण्वन्तु नो वर्षणः पर्वतासो धरुवक्षेमास इळया मदन्तः|	hear us the mouatains which distil the raindrops and resting firm rejoice in freshening moisture.
आदित्यैर्नो अदितिः शर्णोतु यछन्तु नो मरुतः शर्मभद्रम|	may aditi with the Ādityas hear us and maruts grant us their auspicious shelter.
सदा सुगः पितुमानस्तु पन्था मध्व देवा ओषधीः सम्पिप्र्क्त|	soft be our path for ever wellprovisioned with pleasant meath o gods the herbs besprinkle.
भगो मे अग्ने सख्ये न मर्ध्या उद रायो अश्यां सदनं पुरुक्षोः|	safe be my bliss o agni in thy friendship may i attain the seat of foodful riches.
सवदस्व हव्या समिषो दिदीह्यस्मद्र्यक सं मिमीहि शरवांसि|	enjoy the offering beam thou strength upon us combine thou for our good all kinds of glory.
विश्वानग्ने पर्त्सु तञ जेषि शत्रूनहा विश्वा सुमना दीदिही नः|	conquer in battle agni all those foemen and light us every day with loving kindness.
अग्निं होतारं पर वर्णे मियेधे गर्त्सं कविं विश्वविदममूरम|	agni quick sage infallible allknowing i choose to be our priest at this oblation.
स नो यक्षद देवताता यजीयान राये वाजाय वनतेमघानि|	in our gods service he best skilled shall worship may he obtain us boons for strength and riches.
पर ते अग्ने हविष्मतीमियर्म्यछा सुद्युम्नां रातिनीं घर्ताचीम|	agni to thee i lift the oilfed ladle bright with an offering bearing our oblation.
परदक्षिणिद देवतातिमुराणः सं रातिभिर्वसुभिर्यज्ञमश्रेत|	from the right hand choosing the gods attendance he with rich presents hath arranged the worship.
स तेजीयसा मनसा तवोत उत शिक्ष सवपत्यस्य शिक्षोः|	of keenest spirit is the man thou aidest give us good offspring thou who givest freely.
अग्ने रायो नर्तमस्य परभूतौ भूयाम ते सुष्टुतयश्च वस्वः|	in power of wealth most rich in men o agni of thee the good may we sing forth fair praises.
भूरीणि हि तवे दधिरे अनीकाग्ने देवस्य यज्यवो जनासः|	men as they worship thee the god o agni have set on thee full many a brilliant aspect.
स आ वह देवतातिं यविष्ठ शर्धो यदद्य दिव्यंयजासि|	so bring most youthful one the gods assembly the heavenly host which thou today shalt honour.
यत तवा होतारमनजन मियेधे निषादयन्तो यजथाय देवाः|	when gods anoint thee priest at their oblation and seat thee for thy task as sacrificer.
स तवं नो अग्नेअवितेह बोध्यधि शरवांसि धेहि नस्तनूषु|	o agni be thou here our kind defender and to ourselves vouchsafe the gift of glory.
अस्तीदमधिमन्थनमस्ति परजननं कर्तम|	here is the gear for friction here tinder made ready for the spark.
एतां विश्पत्नीमा भराग्निं मन्थाम पूर्वथा|	bring thou the matron we will rub agni in ancient fashion forth.
अरण्योर्निहितो जातवेदा गर्भ इव सुधितो गर्भिणीषु|	n the two firesticks jātavedas lieth even as the wellset germ in pregnant women.
दिवेदिव ईड्यो जाग्र्वद्भिर्हविष्मद्भिर्मनुष्येभिरग्निः|	agni who day by day must be exalted by men who watch and worship with oblations.
उत्तानायामव भरा चिकित्वान सद्यः परवीता वर्षणं जजान|	lay this with care on that which lies extended straight hath she borne the steer when made prolific.
अरुषस्तूपो रुशदस्य पाज इळायास पुत्रो वयुनेअजनिष्ट|	with his red pillarradiant is his splendourin our skilled task is born the son of iḷā.
इळायास्त्वा पदे वयं नाभा पर्थिव्या अधि|	in iḷās place we set thee down upon the central point of earth.
जातवेदो नि धीमह्यग्ने हव्याय वोळ्हवे|	that agni jātavedas thou mayst bear our offerings to the gods.
मन्थता नरः कविमद्वयन्तं परचेतसमम्र्तं सुप्रतीकम|	rub into life ye men the sage the guileless immortal very wise and fair to look on.
यज्ञस्य केतुं परथमं पुरस्तादग्निं नरो जनयता सुशेवम|	o men bring forth the most propitious agni first ensign of the sacrifice to eastward.
यदी मन्थन्ति बाहुभिर्वि रोचतेअश्वो न वाज्यरुषो वनेष्वा|	when with their arms they rub him straight he shineth forth like a strong courser red in colour in the wood.
चित्रो न यामन्नश्विनोरनिव्र्तः परि वर्णक्त्यश्मनस्त्र्णा दहन|	bright checkless as it were upon the aśvins path he passeth by the stones and burneth up the grass.
जातो अग्नी रोचते चेकितानो वाजी विप्रः कविशस्तः सुदानुः|	agni shines forth when born observant mighty the bountiful the singer praised by sages.
यं देवास ईड्यं विश्वविदं हव्यवाहमदधुरध्वरेषु|	whom as adorable and knowing all things gods set at solemn rites as offeringbearer.
सीद होतः सव उ लोके चिकित्वान सादया यज्ञं सुक्र्तस्य योनौ|	set thee o priest in thine own place observant lay down the sacrifice in the home of worship.
देवावीर्देवान हविषा यजास्यग्ने बर्हद यजमाने वयो धाः|	thou dear to gods shalt serve them with oblation agni give long life to the sacrificer.
कर्णोत धूमं वर्षणं सखायोअस्रेधन्त इतन वाजमछ|	raise ye a mighty smoke my fellowworkers ye shall attain to wealth without obstruction.
अयमग्निः पर्तनाषाट सुवीरो येन देवासो असहन्त दस्यून|	this agni is the battlewinning hero by whom the gods have overcome the dasyus.
अयं ते योनिर्र्त्वियो यतो जातो अरोचथाः|	this is thine ordered place of birth whence sprung to life thou shonest forth.
तं जानन्नग्न आ सीदाथा नो वर्धया गिरः|	knowing this agni sit thee down and prosper thou the songs we sing.
तनूनपादुच्यते गर्भ आसुरो नराशंसो भवति यद विजायते|	as germ celestial he is called tanūnapāt and narāśaṁsa born diffused in varied shape.
मातरिश्वा यदमिमीत मातरि वातस्य सर्गो अभवत्सरीमणि|	formed in his mother he is mātariśvan he hath in his course become the rapid flight of wind.
सुनिर्मथा निर्मथितः सुनिधा निहितः कविः|	with strong attrition rubbed to life laid down with careful hand a sage.
अग्ने सवध्वरा कर्णु देवान देवयते यज|	agni make sacrifices good and for the pious bring the gods.
अजीजनन्नम्र्तं मर्त्यासोअस्रेमाणं तरणिं वीळुजम्भम|	mortals have brought to life the god immortal the conqueror with mighty jaws unfailing.
दश सवसारो अग्रुवः समीचीः पुमांसं जातमभि सं रभन्ते|	the sisters ten unwedded and united together grasp the babe the newborn infant.
पर सप्तहोता सनकादरोचत मातुरुपस्थे यदशोचदूधनि|	served by the seven priests he shone forth from ancient time when in his mothers bosom in her lap he glowed.
न नि मिषति सुरणो दिवेदिवे यदसुरस्य जठरादजायत|	giving delight each day he closeth not his eye since from the asuras body hewas brought to life.
अमित्रायुधो मरुतामिव परयाः परथमजा बरह्मणो विश्वमिद विदुः|	even as the maruts onslaughts who attack the foe those born the first of all knew the full power of prayer.
दयुम्नवद बरह्म कुशिकास एरिर एकएको दमे अग्निं समीधिरे|	the kuśikas have made the glorious hymn ascend and each one singly in his home have kindled fire.
यदद्य तवा परयति यज्ञे अस्मिन होतश्चिकित्वोअव्र्णीमहीह|	as we o priest observant have elected thee this day what time the solemn sacrifice began.
धरुवमया धरुवमुताशमिष्ठाः परजानन विद्वानुप याहि सोमम|	so surely hast thou worshipped surely hast thou toiled come thou unto the soma wise and knowing all.
तवामग्ने मनीषिणः सम्राजं चर्षणीनाम|	thee agni god imperial lord of all mankind do mortal men.
देवं मर्तास इन्धते समध्वरे|	with understanding kindle at the sacrifice.
तवां यज्ञेष्व रत्विजमग्ने होतारमीळते|	they laud thee in their solemn rites agni as minister and priest.
गोपा रतस्य दीदिहि सवे दमे|	shine forth in thine own home as guardian of the law.
स घा यस्ते ददाशति समिधा जातवेदसे|	he verily who honours thee with fuel knower of all life.
सो अग्ने धत्तेसुवीर्यं स पुष्यति|	he agni wins heroic might he prospers well.
स केतुरध्वराणामग्निर्देवेभिरा गमत|	ensign of sacrifices he agni with gods is come to us.
अञ्जानः सप्त होत्र्भिर्हविष्मते|	decked by the seven priests to him who bringeth gifts.
पर होत्रे पूर्व्यं वचोअग्नये भरता बर्हत|	to agni the invoking priest offer your best your lofty speech.
विपां जयोतींषि बिभ्रते न वेधसे|	to him ordainerlike who brings the light of songs.
अग्निं वर्धन्तु नो गिरो यतो जायत उक्थ्यः|	let these our hymns make agni grow whence meet for laud he springs to life.
महे वाजायद्रविणाय दर्शतः|	to mighty strength and great possession fair to see.
अग्ने यजिष्ठो अध्वरे देवान देवयते यज|	best sacrificer bring the gods o agni to the pious man.
होता मन्द्रो विराजस्यति सरिधः|	a joyful priest thy splendour drive our foes afar.
स नः पावक दीदिहि दयुमदस्मे सुवीर्यम|	as such o purifier shine on us heroic glorious might.
भवा सतोत्र्भ्योन्तमः सवस्तये|	be nearest friend to those who laud thee for their weal.
तं तवा विप्रा विपन्यवो जाग्र्वांसः समिन्धते|	so wakeful versed in sacred hymns the holy singers kindly thee.
हव्यवाहममर्त्यं सहोव्र्धम|	oblationbearer deathless cherisher of strength.
इछन्ति तवा सोम्यासः सखायः सुन्वन्ति सोमं दधति परयांसि|	the friends who offer soma long to find thee they pour forth soma and present their viands.
तितिक्षन्ते अभिशस्तिं जनानामिन्द्र तवदा कश्चन हि परकेतः|	they bear unmoved the cursing of the people for all our wisdom comes from thee o indra.
न ते दूरे परमा चिद रजांस्या तु पर याहि हरिवो हरिभ्याम|	not far for thee are midairs loftiest regions start hither lord of bays with thy bay horses.
सथिराय वर्ष्णे सवना कर्तेमा युक्ता गरावाणः समिधाने अग्नौ|	made for the firm and strong are these libations the pressingstones are set and fire is kindled.
इन्द्रः सुशिप्रो मघवा तरुत्रो महाव्रातस्तुविकूर्मिर्र्घावान|	fair cheeks hath indra maghavan the victor lord of a great host stormer strong in action.
यदुग्रो धा बाधितो मर्त्येषु कव तया ते वर्षभ वीर्याणि|	what once thou didst in might when mortals vexed theewhere now o bull are those thy hero exploits.
तवं हि षमा चयावयन्नच्युतान्येको वर्त्रा चरसि जिघ्नमानः|	for overthrowing what hath neer been shaken thou goest forth alone destroying vṛtras.
तव दयावाप्र्थिवी पर्वतासोअनु वरताय निमितेव तस्थुः|	for him who followeth thy law the mountains and heaven and earth stand as if firmly stablished.
उताभये पुरुहूत शरवोभिरेको दर्ळ्हमवदो वर्त्रहा सन|	yea muchinvoked in safety through thy glories alone thou speakest truth as vṛtras slayer.
इमे चिदिन्द्र रोदसी अपारे यत संग्र्भ्णा मघवन काशिरित ते|	een these two boundless worlds to thee o indra what time thou graspest them are but a handful.
पर सू त इन्द्र परवता हरिभ्यां पर ते वज्रः परम्र्णन्नेतु शत्रून|	forthwith thy bay steeds down the steep o indra forth crushing foemen go thy bolt of thunder.
जहि परतीचो अनूचः पराचो विश्वं सत्यंक्र्णुहि विष्टमस्तु|	slay those who meet thee those who flee who follow make all thy promise true be all completed.
यस्मै धायुरदधा मर्त्यायाभक्तं चिद भजते गेह्यं सः|	the man to whom thou givest as provider enjoys domestic plenty undivided.
भद्रा त इन्द्र सुमतिर्घ्र्ताची सहस्रदाना पुरुहूत रातिः|	blest indra is thy favour dropping fatness thy worship muchinvoked brings gifts in thousands.
सहदानुं पुरुहूत कषियन्तमहस्तमिन्द्र सं पिणक कुणारुम|	thou indra muchinvoked didst crush to pieces kunaru handless fiend who dwelt with danu.
अभि वर्त्रं वर्धमानं पियारुमपादमिन्द्र तवसा जघन्थ|	thou with might indra smotest dead the scorner the footless vṛtra as he waxed in vigour.
नि सामनामिषिरामिन्द्र भूमिं महीमपारां सदने ससत्थ|	thou hast established in her seat o indra the level earth vast vigorous unbounded.
अस्तभ्नाद दयां वर्षभो अन्तरिक्षमर्षन्त्वापस्त्वयेह परसूताः|	the bull hath propped the heaven and airs midregion by thee sent onward let the floods flow hither.
अलात्र्णो वल इन्द्र वरजो गोः पुरा हन्तोर्भयमानो वयार|	he who withheld the kine in silence i yielded in fear before thy blow o indra.
सुगान पथो अक्र्णोन निरजे गाः परावन वाणीः पुरुहूतं धमन्तीः|	he made paths easy to drive forth the cattle loudbreathing praises helped the muchinvoked one.
एको दवे वसुमती समीची इन्द्र आ पप्रौ पर्थिवीमुत दयाम|	indra alone filled full the earth and heaven the pair who meet together rich in treasures.
उतान्तरिक्षादभि नः समीक इषो रथीः सयुजः शूर वाजान|	yea bring thou near us from the airs midregion strength on thy car and wholesome food o hero.
दिशः सूर्यो न मिनाति परदिष्टा दिवेदिवे हर्यश्वप्रसूताः|	sūrya transgresses not the ordered limits set daily by the lord of tawny coursers.
सं यदानळ अध्वन आदिदश्वैर्विमोचनं कर्णुते तत तवस्य|	when to the goal he comes his journey ended his steeds he looses this is indras doing.
दिद्र्क्षन्त उषसो यामन्नक्तोर्विवस्वत्या महि चित्रमनीकम|	men gladly in the course of night would look on the broad bright front of the refulgent morning.
विश्वे जानन्ति महिना यदागादिन्द्रस्य कर्म सुक्र्तापुरूणि|	and all acknowledge when she comes in glory the manifold and goodly works of indra.
महि जयोतिर्निहितं वक्षणास्वामा पक्वं चरति बिभ्रती गौः|	a mighty splendour rests upon her bosom bearing ripe milk the cow unripe advances.
विश्वं सवाद्म सम्भ्र्तमुस्रियायां यत सीमिन्द्रो अदधाद भोजनाय|	all sweetness is collected in the heifer sweetness which indra made for our enjoyment.
इन्द्र दर्ह्य यामकोशा अभूवन यज्ञाय शिक्ष गर्णते सखिभ्यः|	barring the way they come be firm o indra aid friends to sacrifice and him who singeth.
दुर्मायवो दुरेवा मर्त्यासो निषङगिणो रिपवो हन्त्वासः|	these must be slain by thee malignant mortals armed with ill arts our quiverbearing foemen.
सं घोषः शर्ण्वेअवमैरमित्रैर्जही नयेष्वशनिं तपिष्ठाम|	a cry is beard from enemies most near us against them send thy fiercestflaming weapon.
वर्श्चेमधस्ताद वि रुजा सहस्व जहि रक्षो मघवन रन्धयस्व|	rend them from under crush them and subdue them slay maghavan and make the fiends our booty.
उद वर्ह रक्षः सहमूलमिन्द्र वर्श्चा मध्यं परत्यग्रंश्र्णीहि|	root up the race of rākṣasas o indra rend it in front and crush it in the middle.
आ कीवतः सललूकं चकर्थ बरह्मद्विषे तपुषिं हेतिमस्य|	how long hast thou bebaved as one who wavers cast thy hot dart at him who hates devotion.
सवस्तये वाजिभिश्च परणेतः सं यन महीरिष आसत्सिपूर्वीः|	when borne by strong steeds for our weal o leader thou seatest thee at many noble viands.
रायो वन्तारो बर्हतः सयामास्मे अस्तु भग इन्द्रप्रजावान|	may we be winners of abundant riches may indra be our wealth with store of children.
आ नो भर भगमिन्द्र दयुमन्तं नि ते देष्णस्य धीमहि पररेके|	bestow on us resplendent wealth o indra let us enjoy thine overflow of bounty.
ऊर्व इव पप्रथे कामो अस्मे तमा पर्ण वसुपते वसूनाम|	wide as a sea our longing hath expanded fulfil it o thou treasurelord of treasures.
इमं कामं मन्दया गोभिरश्वैश्चन्द्रवता राधसा पप्रथश्च|	with kine and horses satisfy this longing with very splendid bounty skill extend it.
सवर्यवो मतिभिस्तुभ्यं विप्रा इन्द्राय वाहःकुशिकासो अक्रन|	seeking the light with hymns to thee o indra kuśikas have brought their gift the singers.
आ नो गोत्रा दर्द्र्हि गोपते गाः समस्मभ्यं सनयो यन्तु वाजाः|	lord of the kine burst the kines stable open cows shall be ours and strength that wins the booty.
दिवक्षा असि वर्षभ सत्यशुष्मोअस्मभ्यं सु मघवन बोधि गोदाः|	hero whose might is true thy home is heaven to us o maghavan grant gifts of cattle.
शुनं हुवेम मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन भरे नर्तमं वाजसातौ|	call we on maghavan auspicious indra best hero in this fight where spoil is gathered.
शर्ण्वन्तमुग्रमूतये समत्सु घनन्तं वर्त्राणि संजितं धनानाम|	the strong who listens who gives aid in battles who slays the vṛtras wins and gathers riches.
वैश्वानरं मनसाग्निं निचाय्या हविष्मन्तो अनुषत्यं सवर्विदम|	revering in our heart agni vaiśvānara the finder of the light whose promises are true.
सुदानुं देवं रथिरं वसूयवो गीर्भी रण्वंकुशिकासो हवामहे|	the liberal gladsome carborne god we kuśikas invoke him with oblation seeking wealth with songs.
तं शुभ्रमग्निमवसे हवामहे वैश्वानरं मातरिश्वानमुक्थ्यम|	that agni bright vaiśvānara we invoke for help and mātariśvan worthy of the song of praise.
बर्हस्पतिं मनुषो देवतातये विप्रं शरोतारमतिथिं रघुष्यदम|	bṛhaspati for mans observance of the gods the singer prompt to hear the swiftlymoving guest.
अश्वो न करन्दञ जनिभिः समिध्यते वैश्वानरः कुशिकेभिर्युगेयुगे|	age after age vaiśvānara neighing like a horse is kindled with the women by the kuśikas.
स नो अग्निः सुवीर्यं सवश्व्यं दधातु रत्नमम्र्तेषु जाग्र्विः|	may agni he who wakes among immortal gods grant us heroic strength and wealth in noble steeds.
पर यन्तु वाजास्तविषीभिरग्नयः शुभे सम्मिष्लाः पर्षतीरयुक्षत|	let them go forth the strong as flames of fire with might gathered for victory they have yoked their spotted deer.
बर्हदुक्षो मरुतो विश्ववेदसः पर वेपयन्तिपर्वतानदाभ्याः|	pourers of floods the maruts masters of all wealth they who can neer be conquered make the mountains shake.
अग्निश्रियो मरुतो विश्वक्र्ष्टय आ तवेषमुग्रमव ईमहे वयम|	the maruts friends of men are glorious as the fire their mighty and resplendent succour we implore.
ते सवानिनो रुद्रिया वर्षनिर्णिजः सिंहा न हेषक्रतवः सुदानवः|	those storming sons of rudra clothed in robes of rain boongivers of good gifts roar as the lions roar.
वरातंवरातं गणंगणं सुशस्तिभिरग्नेर्भामं मरुतामोज ईमहे|	we band on band and troop following troop entreat with fair lauds agnis splendour and the maruts might.
पर्षदश्वासो अनवभ्रराधसो गन्तारो यज्ञं विदथेषु धीराः|	with spotted deer for steeds with wealth that never fails they wise ones come to sacrifice at our gatherings.
अग्निरस्मि जन्मना जातवेदा घर्तं मे चक्षुरम्र्तं म आसन|	agni am i who know by birth all creatures mine eye is butter in my mouth is nectar.
अर्कस्त्रिधातू रजसो विमानोअजस्रो घर्मो हविरस्मि नाम|	i am light threefold measurer of the region exhaustless heat am i named burntoblation.
तरिभिः पवित्रैरपुपोद धयर्कं हर्दा मतिं जयोतिरनु परजानन|	bearing in mind a thought with light accordant he purified the sun with three refinings.
वर्षिष्ठं रत्नमक्र्त सवधाभिरादिद दयावाप्र्थिवी पर्यपश्यत|	by his own nature gained the highest treasure and looked abroad over the earth and heaven.
शतधारमुत्समक्षीयमाणं विपश्चितं पितरं वक्त्वानाम|	the spring that fails not with a hundred streamlets father inspired of prayers that men should utter.
मेळिं मदन्तं पित्रोरुपस्थे तं रोदसी पिप्र्तं सत्यवाचम|	the sparkler joyous in his parents bosorn him the truthspeaker sate ye earth and heaven.
अयं ते अस्तु हर्यतः सोम आ हरिभिः सुतः|	may this delightsome soma be expressed for thee by tawny stones.
जुषाण इन्द्र हरिभिर्न आ गह्या तिष्ठ हरितं रथम|	joying thereat o indra with thy bay steeds come ascend thy goldencoloured car.
हर्यन्नुषसमर्चयः सूर्यं हर्यन्नरोचयः|	in love thou madest uṣas glow in love thou madest sūrya shine.
विद्वांष्चिकित्वान हर्यश्व वर्धस इन्द्र विश्वा अभि शरियः|	thou indra knowing thinking lord of tawny steeds above all glories waxest great.
दयामिन्द्रो हरिधायसं पर्थिवीं हरिवर्पसम|	the heaven with streams of golden hue earth with her tints of green and gold.
अधारयद धरितोर्भूरि भोजनं ययोरन्तर्हरिश्चरत|	the golden pair yield indra plenteous nourishment between them moves the golden one.
जज्ञानो हरितो वर्षा विश्वमा भाति रोचनम|	when born to life the golden bull illumines all the realm of light.
हर्यश्वो हरितं धत्त आयुधमा वज्रं बाह्वोर्हरिम|	he takes his golden weapon lord of tawny steeds the golden thunder in his arms.
इन्द्रो हर्यन्तमर्जुनं वज्रं शुक्रैरभीव्र्तम|	the bright the wellloved thunderbolt girt with the bright indra disclosed.
अपाव्र्णोद धरिभिरद्रिभिः सुतमुद गा हरिभिराजत|	disclosed the soma juice pressed out by tawny stones with tawny steeds drave forth the kine.
इन्द्राग्नी आ गतं सुतं गीर्भिर्नभो वरेण्यम|	moved indraagni by our hymn come to the juice the precious dew.
अस्य पातं धियेषिता|	drink ye thereof impelled by song.
इन्द्राग्नी जरितुः सचा यज्ञो जिगाति चेतनः|	o indraagni with the man who lauds you comes the wakening rite.
अया पातमिमं सुतम|	so drink ye both this juice assured.
इन्द्रमग्निं कविछदा यज्ञस्य जूत्या वर्णे|	through force of sacrifice i choose indraagni who love the wise.
ता सोमस्येह तर्म्पताम|	with soma let these sate them here.
तोशा वर्त्रहणा हुवे सजित्वानापराजिता|	indra and agni i invoke jointvictors bounteous unsubdued.
इन्द्राग्नी वाजसातमा|	foeslayers best to win the spoil.
पर वामर्चन्त्युक्थिनो नीथाविदो जरितारः|	indra and agni singers skilled in melody hymn you bringing lauds.
इन्द्राग्नी इष आ वर्णे|	i choose you for the sacred food.
इन्द्राग्नी नवतिं पुरो दासपत्नीरधूनुतम|	indra and agni ye cast down the ninety forts which dāsas held.
साकमेकेन कर्मणा|	together with one mighty deed.
इन्द्राग्नी अपसस पर्युप पर यन्ति धीतयः|	to indraagni reverent thoughts go forward from the holy task.
रतस्य पथ्या अनु|	along the path of sacred law.
इन्द्राग्नी तविषाणि वां सधस्थानि परयांसि च|	o indraagni powers are yours and dwellings and delightful food.
युवोरप्तूर्यं हितम|	good is your readiness to act.
इन्द्राग्नी रोचना दिवः परि वाजेषु भूषथः|	indra and agni in your deeds of might ye deck heavens lucid realms.
तद वांचेति पर वीर्यम|	famed is that hero strength of yours.
मरुत्वानिन्द्र वर्षभो रणाय पिबा सोममनुष्वधं मदाय|	drink indra marutgirt as bull the soma for joy for rapture even as thou listest.
आ सिञ्चस्व जठरे मध्व ऊर्मिं तवं राजासि परदिवः सुतानाम|	pour down the flood of meath within thy belly thou from of old art king of soma juices.
सजोषा इन्द्र सगणो मरुद्भिः सोमं पिब वर्त्रहा शूर विद्वान|	indra accordant with the banded maruts drink soma hero as wise vṛtraslayer.
जहि शत्रून्रप मर्धो नुदस्वाथाभयं कर्णुहि विश्वतो नः|	slay thou our foemen drive away assailants and make us safe on every side from danger.
उत रतुभिर्र्तुपाः पाहि सोममिन्द्र देवेभिः सखिभिः सुतं नः|	and drinker at due seasons drink in season indra with friendly gods our pressedout soma.
यानाभजो मरुतो ये तवान्वहन वर्त्रमदधुस्तुभ्यमोजः|	the maruts following whom thou madest sharers gave thee the victory and thou slewest vṛtra.
ये तवाहिहत्ये मघवन्नवर्धन ये शाम्बरे हरिवो ये गविष्टौ|	drink soma indra banded with the maruts who maghavan strengthened thee at ahis slaughter.
ये तवा नूनमनुमदन्ति विप्राः पिबेन्द्र सोमं सगणो मरुद्भिः|	gainst Śambara lord of bays in winning cattle and now rejoice in thee the holy singers.
मरुत्वन्तं वर्षभं वाव्र्धानमकवारिं दिव्यं शासमिन्द्रम|	the bull whose strength hath waxed whom maruts follow freegiving indra the celestial ruler.
विश्वासाहमवसे नूतनायोग्रं सहोदामिह तंहुवेम|	mighty allconquering the victorygiver him let us call to grant us new protection.
समितसमित सुमना बोध्यस्मे शुचाशुचा सुमतिं रासि वस्वः|	be friendly with each kindled log of fuel with every flash bestow the boon of riches.
आ देव देवान यजथाय वक्षि सखा सखीन सुमना यक्ष्यग्ने|	bring thou the gods o god unto our worship serve wellinclined as friend thy friends o agni.
यं देवासस्त्रिरहन्नायजन्ते दिवेदिवे वरुणो मित्रो अग्निः|	agni whom daily varuṇa and mitra the gods bring thrice a day to this our worship.
सेमं यज्ञं मधुमन्तं कर्धी नस्तनूनपाद घर्तयोनिं विधन्तम|	tanūnapāt enrich with meath our service that dwells with holy oil that offers honour.
पर दीधितिर्विश्ववारा जिगाति होतारमिळः परथमं यजध्यै|	the thought that bringeth every boon proceedeth to worship first the priest of the libation.
अछा नमोभिर्व्र्षभं वन्दध्यै स देवान यक्षदिषितो यजीयान|	that we may greet the strong one with our homage urged may he bring the gods best sacrificer.
ऊर्ध्वो वां गातुरध्वरे अकार्यूर्ध्वा शोचींषि परस्थिता रजांसि|	on high your way to sacrifice was made ready the radiant flames went upward to the regions.
दिवो वा नाभा नयसादि होता सत्र्णीमहि देवव्यचा वि बर्हिः|	full in the midst of heaven the priest is seated sirew we the sacred grass where gods may rest them.
सप्त होत्राणि मनसा वर्णाना इन्वन्तो विश्वं परति यन्न्र्तेन|	claiming in mind the seven priests burntoblations inciting all they came in settled order.
नर्पेशसो विदथेषु पर जाता अभीमं यज्ञं वि चरन्त पूर्वीः|	to this our sacrifice approach the many who show in hero beauty at assemblies.
आ भन्दमाने उषसा उपाके उत समयेते तन्वा विरूपे|	night and dawn lauded hither come together both smiling different are their forms in colour.
यथा नो मित्रो वरुणो जुजोषदिन्द्रो मरुत्वानुत वा महोभिः|	that varuṇa and mitra may accept us and indra girt by maruts with his glories.
दैव्या होतारा परथमा नय रञ्जे सप्त पर्क्षासः सवधयामदन्ति|	i crave the grace of heavens two chief invokers the seven swift steeds joy in their wonted manner.
रतं शंसन्त रतमित त आहुरनु वरतं वरतपा दीध्यानाः|	these speak of truth praising the truth eternal thinking on order as the guards of order.
आ भारती भारतीभिः सजोषा इळा देवैर्मनुष्येभिरग्निः|	may bhāratī with all her sisters iḷā accordant with the gods with mortalls agni.
सरस्वती सारस्वतेभिरर्वाक तिस्रो देवीर्बर्हिरेदं सदन्तु|	sarasvatī with all her kindred rivers come to this grass three goddesses and seat them.
तन नस्तुरीपमध पोषयित्नु देव तवष्टर्वि रराणः सयस्व|	well pleased with us do thou o god o tvaṣṭar give ready issue to our procreant vigour.
यतो वीरः कर्मण्यः सुदक्षो युक्तग्रावा जायते देवकामः|	whence springs the hero powerful skilled in action lover of gods adjuster of the pressstones.
वनस्पतेअव सर्जोप देवानग्निर्हविः शमिता सूदयाति|	send to the gods the oblation lord of forests and let the immolator agni dress it.
सेदु होता सत्यतरो यजाति यथा देवानां जनिमानि वेद|	he as the truer priest shall offer worship for the gods generations well he knoweth.
आ याह्यग्ने समिधानो अर्वां इन्द्रेण देवैः सरथं तुरेभिः|	come thou to us o agni duly kindled together with the potent gods and indra.
बर्हिर्न आस्तामदितिः सुपुत्रा सवाहा देवा अम्र्तामादयन्ताम|	on this our grass sit aditi happy mother and let our hail delight the gods immortal.
उषसः पूर्वा अध यद वयूषुर्महद वि जज्ञे अक्षरं पदे गोः|	at the first shining of the earliest mornings in the cows home was born the great eternal.
वरता देवानामुप नु परभूषन महद देवानामसुरत्वमेकम|	now shall the statutes of the gods be valid great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
मो षू णो अत्र जुहुरन्त देवा मा पूर्वे अग्ने पितरः पदज्ञाः|	let not the gods here injure us o agni nor fathers of old time who know the region.
पुराण्योः सद्मनोः केतुरन्तर्म|	nor the sign set between two ancient dwellings great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
वि मे पुरुत्रा पतयन्ति कामाः शम्यछा दीद्ये पूर्व्याणि|	my wishes fly abroad to many places i glance back to the ancient sacrifices.
समिद्धे अग्नाव रतमिद वदेम म|	let us declare the truth when fire is kindled great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
समानो राजा विभ्र्तः पुरुत्रा शये शयासु परयुतो वनानु|	king universal born to sundry quarters extended through the wood be lies on couches.
अन्या वत्सं भरति कषेति माता म|	one mother rests another feeds the infant great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
आक्षित पूर्वास्वपरा अनूरुत सद्यो जातासु तरुणीष्वन्तः|	lodged in old plants he grows again in younger swiftly within the newlyborn and tender.
अन्तर्वतीः सुवते अप्रवीता म|	though they are unimpregned he makes them fruitful great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
शयुः परस्तादध नु दविमाताबन्धनश्चरति वत्स एकः|	now lying far away child of two mothers he wanders unrestrained the single youngling.
मित्रस्य ता वरुणस्य वरतानि म|	these are the laws of varuṇa and mitra great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
दविमाता होता विदथेषु सम्राळ अन्वग्रं चरति कषेति बुध्नः|	child of two mothers priest sole lord in synods he still precedes while resting as foundation.
पर रण्यानि रण्यवाचो भरन्ते म|	they who speak sweetly bring him sweet addresses great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
शूरस्येव युध्यतो अन्तमस्य परतीचीनं दद्र्शे विश्वमायत|	as to a friendly warrior when he battles each thing that comes anear is seen to meet him.
अन्तर्मतिश्चरति निष्षिधं गोर्म|	the hymn commingles with the cows oblation great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
नि वेवेति पलितो दूत आस्वन्तर्महांश्चरति रोचनेन|	deep within these the hoary envoy pierceth mighty he goeth to the realm of splendour.
वपूंषि बिभ्रदभि नो वि चष्टे म|	and looketh on us clad in wondrous beauty great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
विष्णुर्गोपाः परमं पाति पाथः परिया धामान्यम्र्तादधानः|	viṣṇu the guardian keeps the loftiest station upholding dear immortal dwellingplaces.
अग्निष टा विश्वा भुवनानि वेद म|	agni knows well all these created beings great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
नाना चक्राते यम्या वपूंषि तयोरन्यद रोचते कर्ष्णमन्यत|	ye variant pair have made yourselves twin beauties one of the twain is dark bright shines the other.
शयावी च यदरुषी च सवसारौ म|	and yet these two the dark the red are sisters great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
माता च यत्र दुहिता च धेनू सबर्दुघे धापयेते समीची|	where the two cows the mother and the daughter meet and give suck yielding their lordly nectar.
रतस्य ते सदसीळे अन्तर्म|	i praise them at the seat of law eternal great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
अन्यस्या वत्सं रिहती मिमाय कया भुवा नि दधे धेनुरूधः|	loud hath she lowed licking the others youngling on what world hath the milchcow laid her udder.
रतस्य सा पयसापिन्वतेळा म|	this iḷā streameth with the milk of order great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
पद्या वस्ते पुरुरूपा वपूंष्यूर्ध्वा तस्थौ तर्यविं रेरिहाणा|	earth weareth beauties manifold uplifted licking her calf of eighteen months she standeth.
रतस्य सद्म वि चरामि विद्वान म|	wellskilled i seek the seat of law eternal great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
पदे इव निहिते दस्मे अन्तस्तयोरन्यद गुह्यमाविरन्यत|	within a wondrous place the twain are treasured the one is manifest the other hidden.
सध्रीचीना पथ्या सा विषूची म|	one common pathway leads in two directions great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
आ धेनवो धुनयन्तामशिश्वीः सबर्दुघाः शशया अप्रदुग्धाः|	let the milchkine that have no calves storm downward yielding rich nectar streaming unexhausted.
नव्यानव्या युवतयो भवन्तीर्म|	these who are ever new and fresh and youthful great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
यदन्यासु वर्षभो रोरवीति सो अन्यस्मिन यूथे नि दधातिरेतः|	what time the bull bellows in other regions another herd receives the genial moisture.
स हि कषपावान स भगः स राजा म|	for he is bhaga king the earths protector great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
वीरस्य नु सवश्व्यं जनासः पर नु वोचाम विदुरस्य देवाः|	let us declare the heros wealth in horses o all ye folk of this the gods have knowledge.
षोळ्हा युक्ताः पञ्चपञ्चा वहन्ति म|	sixfold they bear him or by fives are harnessed great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
देवस्त्वष्टा सविता विश्वरूपः पुपोष परजाः पुरुधाजजान|	tvaṣṭar the god the omniform creator begets and feeds mankind in various manner.
इमा च विश्वा भुवनान्यस्य म|	his verily arc all these living creatures great is the gods supreme dominion.
मही समैरच्चम्वा समीची उभे ते अस्य वसुना नय्र्ष्टे|	the two great meeting bowls hath he united each of the pair is laden with histreasure.
शर्ण्वे वीरो विन्दमानो वसूनि म|	the hero is renowned for gathering riches great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
इमां च नः पर्थिवीं विश्वधाया उप कषेति हितमित्रो नराजा|	yea and on this our earth the allsustainer dwells like a king with noble friends about him.
पुरःसदः शर्मसदो न वीरा म|	in his protection heroes rest in safety great is the cods supreme and sole dominion.
निष्षिध्वरीस्त ओषधीरुतापो रयिं त इन्द्र पर्थिवी बिभर्ति|	rich in their gifts for thee are herbs and waters and earth brings all her wealth for thee o indra.
सखायस्ते वामभाजः सयाम म|	may we as friends of thine share goodly treasures great is the gods supreme and sole dominion.
वैश्वानराय धिषणां रताव्र्धे घर्तं न पूतमग्नयेजनामसि|	to him vaiśvānara who strengthens holy law to agni we present our praise like oil made pure.
दविता होतारं मनुषश्च वाघतो धिया रथंन कुलिशः सं रण्वति|	with thoughtful insight human priests bring him anear our herald from of old as an axe forms a car.
स रोचयज्जनुषा रोदसी उभे स मात्रोरभवत पुत्र ईड्यः|	he made the heaven and earth resplendent by his birth child of two mothers he was meet to be implored.
हव्यवाळ अग्निरजरश्चनोहितो दूळभो विशामतिथिर्विभावसुः|	agni oblationbearer gracious everyoung infallible rich in radiant light the guest of men.
करत्वा दक्षस्य तरुषो विधर्मणि देवासो अग्निं जनयन्त चित्तिभिः|	within the range of their surpassinq power by might the gods created agni with inventive thought.
रुरुचानं भानुना जयोतिषा महामत्यं न वाजं सनिष्यन्नुप बरुवे|	i eager to win strength address him like a steed resplendent with his brilliance with his ample light.
आ मन्द्रस्य सनिष्यन्तो वरेण्यं वर्णीमहे अह्रयं वाजम्र्ग्मियम|	eager to gain we crave from him the friendly god strength confident choiceworthy meet to be extolled.
रातिं भर्गूणामुशिजं कविक्रतुमग्निं राजन्तं दिव्येन शोचिषा|	the bhṛgus bounty willing strong with sages lore even agni shining forth with light that comes from heaven.
अग्निं सुम्नाय दधिरे पुरो जना वाजश्रवसमिह वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	for happiness men having trimmed the sacred grass set agni glorious for his strength before them here.
यतस्रुचः सुरुचं विश्वदेव्यं रुद्रं यज्ञानांसाधदिष्टिमपसाम|	yea with raised ladles him bright dear to all the gods perfecting aims of works rudra of solemn rites.
पावकशोचे तव हि कषयं परि होतर्यज्ञेषु वर्क्तबर्हिषो नरः|	around thy dwellingplace o brightlyshining priest are men at sacrifice whose sacred grass is trimmed.
अग्ने दुव इछमानास आप्यमुपासते दरविणं धेहि तेभ्यः|	wishing to do thee service agni they are there desirous of thy friendship grant them store of wealth.
आ रोदसी अप्र्णदा सवर्महज्जातं यदेनमपसो अधारयन|	he hath filled heaven and earth and the great realm of light when at his birth the skilful held him in their hold.
सो अध्वराय परि णीयते कविरत्यो न वाजसातयेचनोहितः|	he like a horse is led forth to the sacrifice sage graciously inclined that he may win us strength.
नमस्यत हव्यदातिं सवध्वरं दुवस्यत दम्यं जातवेदसम|	honour the oblationbearer him who knows fair rites serve ye the household friend who knows all things that be.
रथीर्र्तस्य बर्हतो विचर्षणिरग्निर्देवानामभवत पुरोहितः|	he drives the chariot of the lofty ordinance agni most active is the great high priest of gods.
तिस्रो यह्वस्य समिधः परिज्मनोअग्नेरपुनन्नुशिजो अम्र्त्यवः|	they who are free from death fain for him purified three splendours of the mighty agni circling all.
तासामेकामदधुर्मर्त्ये भुजमु लोकमु दवे उप जामिमीयतुः|	to man for his enjoyment one of these they gave the other two have passed into the sister sphere.
विशां कविं विश्पतिं मानुषीरिषः सं सीमक्र्ण्वन सवधितिं न तेजसे|	mans sacrificial food hath sharpened like an axe for brightness him the sage of men the peoples lord.
स उद्वतो निवतो याति वेविषत स गर्भमेषु भुवनेषु दीधरत|	busied with sacred rites he mounts and he descends he hath laid down his vital germ within these worlds.
स जिन्वते जठरेषु परजज्ञिवान वर्षा चित्रेषु नानदन न सिंहः|	he stirs with life in wombs dissimilar in kind born as a lion or a loudlybellowing bull.
वैश्वानरः पर्थुपाजा अमर्त्यो वसु रत्ना दयमानो वि दाशुषे|	vaiśvānara immortal with widereaching might bestowing goods and wealth on him who offiers gifts.
वैश्वानरः परत्नथा नाकमारुहद दिवस पर्ष्ठं भन्दमानः सुमन्मभिः|	vaiśvānara as of old mounted the cope of heaven heavens ridge well greeted by those skilled in noble songs.
स पूर्ववज्जनयञ जन्तवे धनं समानमज्मं पर्येति जाग्र्विः|	he as of old producing riches for the folk still watchful traversesthe common way again.
रतावानं यज्ञियं विप्रमुक्थ्यमा यं दधे मातरिश्वा दिवि कषयम|	for new prosperity we seek to agni him whose course is splendid goldhaired excellently bright.
तं चित्रयामं हरिकेशमीमहे सुदीतिमग्निं सुविताय नव्यसे|	whom mātariśvan stablished dweller in the heaven meet for high praise and holy sage and true to law.
शुचिं न यामन्निषिरं सवर्द्र्शं केतुं दिवो रोचनस्थामुषर्बुधम|	as pure and swift of course beholder of the light who stands in heavens bright sphere a sign who wakes at dawn.
अग्निं मूर्धानं दिवो अप्रतिष्कुतं तमीमहे नमसा वाजिनं बर्हत|	agni the head of heaven whom none may turn asideto him the powerful with mighty prayer we seek.
मन्द्रं होतारं शुचिमद्वयाविनं दमूनसमुक्थ्यं विश्वचर्षणिम|	the cheerful priest the pure in whom no guile is found friend of the house praiseworthy dear to all mankind.
रथं न चित्रं वपुषाय दर्शतं मनुर्हितं सदमिद राय ईमहे|	fair to behold for beauty like a splendid caragni the friend of men we ever seek for wealth.
अयमग्निः सुवीर्यस्येशे महः सौभगस्य|	this agni is the lord of great felicity and hero strength.
राय ईशे सवपत्यस्य गोमत ईशे वर्त्रहथानाम|	lord of wealth in herds of kine lord of the battles with the foe.
इमं नरो मरुतः सश्चता वर्धं यस्मिन रायः शेव्र्धासः|	wait maruts heroes upon him the prosperer in whom is blissincreasing wealth.
अभि ये सन्ति पर्तनासु दूढ्यो विश्वाहा शत्रुमादभुः|	who in fights ever conquer evilhearted men who overcome the enemy.
स तवं नो रायः शिशीहि मीढ्वो अग्ने सुविर्यस्य|	as such o agni deal us wealth and hero might o bounteous one.
तुविद्युम्न वर्षिष्ठस्य परजावतोअनमीवस्य शुष्मिणः|	most lofty very glorious rich in progeny free from disease and full of power.
चक्रिर्यो विश्वा भुवनाभि सासहिश्चक्रिर्देवेष्वा दुवः|	he who made all that lives who passes all in might who orders service to the gods.
आ देवेषु यतत आ सुवीर्य आ शंस उत नर्णाम|	he works among the gods he works in hero strength yea also in the praise of men.
मा नो अग्नेअमतये मावीरतायै रीरधः|	give us not up to indigence agni nor want of hero sons.
मागोतायै सहसस पुत्र मा निदेअप दवेषांस्या कर्धि|	nor son of strength to lack of cattle nor to blame drive thou our enemies away.
शग्धि वाजस्य सुभग परजावतोअग्ने बर्हतो अध्वरे|	help us to strength blest agni rich in progeny abundant in our sacrifice.
संराया भूयसा सर्ज मयोभुना तुविद्युम्न यशस्वता|	flood us with riches yet more plenteous bringing weal with high renown most glorious one.
पुरोजिती वो अन्धसः सुताय मादयित्नवे|	for first possession of your juice for the exhilarating drink.
अप शवानं शनथिष्टन सखायो दीर्घजिह्व्यम|	drive ye away the dog my friends drive ye the longtongued dog away.
यो धारया पावकया परिप्रस्यन्दते सुतः|	he who with purifying stream effused comes flowing hitherward.
इन्दुरश्वो न कर्त्व्यः|	indu is like an able steed.
तं दुरोषमभी नरः सोमं विश्वाच्या धिया|	the men with allpervading song send unassailable soma forth.
यज्ञं हिन्वन्त्यद्रिभिः|	by pressingstones to sacrifice.
सुतासो मधुमत्तमाः सोमा इन्द्राय मन्दिनः|	the somas very rich in sweets for which the sieve is destined flow.
पवित्रवन्तोक्षरन देवान गछन्तु वो मदाः|	effused the source of indras joy may your strong juices reach the gods.
इन्दुरिन्द्राय पवत इति देवासो अब्रुवन|	indu flows on for indras sake thus have the deities declared.
वाचस पतिर्मखस्यते विश्वस्येशान ओजसा|	the lord of speech exerts himself ruler of all because of might.
सहस्रधारः पवते समुद्रो वाचमीङखयः|	inciter of the voice of song with thousand streams the ocean flows.
सोमः पती रयीणां सखेन्द्रस्य दिवेदिवे|	even soma lord of opulence the friend of indra day by day.
अयं पूषा रयिर्भगः सोमः पुनानो अर्षति|	as pūṣan fortune bhaga comes this soma while they make him pure.
पतिर्विश्वस्य भूमनो वयख्यद रोदसी उभे|	he lord of the multitude hath looked upon the earth and heaven.
समु परिया अनूषत गावो मदाय घर्ष्वयः|	the dear cows lowed in joyful mood together to the gladdening drink.
सोमासः कर्ण्वते पथः पवमानास इन्दवः|	the drops as they were purified the soma juices made then paths.
य ओजिष्ठस्तमा भर पवमन शरवाय्यम|	o pavamana bring the juice the mightiest worthy to be famed.
यः पञ्चचर्षणीरभि रयिं येन वनामहै|	which the five tribes have over them whereby we may win opulence.
सोमाः पवन्त इन्दवोअस्मभ्यं गातुवित्तमः|	for us the soma juices flow the drops best furtherers of our weal.
मित्राः सुवाना अरेपसः सवाध्यः सवर्विदः|	effused as friends without a spot benevolent finders of the light.
सुष्वाणासो वयद्रिभिश्चिताना गोरधि तवचि|	effused by means of pressingstones upon the oxhide visible.
इषमस्मभ्यमभितः समस्वरन वसुविदः|	they treasurefinders have announced food unto us from every side.
एते पूता विपश्चितः सोमासो दध्याशिरः|	tlese soma juices skilled in song purified blent with milk and curd.
सूर्यासो न दर्शतासो जिगत्नवो धरुवा घर्ते|	when moving and when firmly laid in oil resemble lovely suns.
पर सुन्वानस्यान्धसो मर्तो न वर्त तद वचः|	let not the power of men restrain the voice of the outpouring juice.
अप शवानमराधसं हता मखं न भर्गवः|	as bhṛgus sons chased makha so drive ye the greedy hound away.
आ जामिरत्के अव्यत भुजे न पुत्र ओण्योः|	the friend hath wrapped him in his robe as in his parents arms a son.
सरज्जारो न योषणां वरो न योनिमासदम|	he went as lover to a dame to take his station suitorlike.
स वीरो दक्षसाधनो वि यस्तस्तम्भ रोदसी|	that hero who produces strength he who hath propped both worlds apart.
हरिः पवित्रे अव्यत वेधा न योनिमासदम|	goldhued hath wrapped him in the sieve to settle priestlike in his place.
अव्यो वारेभिः पवते सोमो गव्ये अधि तवचि|	soma upon the oxs skin through the sheeps wool flows purified.
कनिक्रदद वर्षा हरिरिन्द्रस्याभ्येति निष्क्र्तम|	bellowing out the tawny steer goes on to indras special place.
हरिं मर्जन्त्यरुषो न युज्यते सं धेनुभिः कलशे सोमो अज्यते|	they cleanse the goldhued like a red steed is he yoked and soma in the jar is mingled with the milk.
उद वाचमीरयति हिन्वते मती पुरुष्टुतस्य कति चित्परिप्रियः|	he sendeth out his voice and many loving friends of him the highly lauded hasten with their songs.
साकं वदन्ति बहवो मनीषिण इन्द्रस्य सोमं जठरे यदादुहुः|	the many sages utter words in unison while into indras throat they pour the soma juice.
यदी मर्जन्ति सुगभस्तयो नरः सनीळाभिर्दशभिः काम्यं मधु|	when with the ten that dwell together closely joined the men whose hands are skilful cleanse the lovely meath.
अरममाणो अत्येति गा अभि सूर्यस्य परियं दुहितुस्तिरो रवम|	he goes upon his way unresting to the cows over the roaring sound which saryas daughter loves.
अन्वस्मै जोषमभरद विनंग्र्सः सं दवयीभिः सवस्र्भिः कषेति जामिभिः|	the falcon brought it to him for his own delight now with the twofold kindred sisters is his home.
नर्धूतो अद्रिषुतो बर्हिषि परियः पतिर्गवां परदिव इन्दुरतवियः|	washed by the men stonepressed dear on the holy grass faithful to seasons lord of cattle from of old.
पुरन्धिवान मनुषो यज्ञसाधनः शुचिर्धियापवते सोम इन्द्र ते|	most liberal completing sacrifice for men o indra pure bright soma indu flows for thee.
नर्बाहुभ्यां चोदितो धारया सुतोअनुष्वधं पवते सोम इन्द्र ते|	o indra urged by arms of men and poured in streams soma flows on for thee afterḥis godlike kind.
आप्राः करतून समजैरध्वरे मतीर्वेर्न दरुषच्चम्वोरासदद धरिः|	plans thou fulfillest gatherest thoughts for sacrifice in the bowls sits the goldhued like a roosting bird.
अंशुं दुहन्ति सतनयन्तमक्षितं कविं कवयोअपसो मनीषिणः|	sages wellskilled in work intelligent drain out the stalk that roars the sage the everlasting one.
समी गावो मतयो यन्ति संयत रतस्य योना सदने पुनर्भुवः|	the milk the hymns unite them with him in the place of sacrifice his seat who is produced anew.
नाभा पर्थिव्या धरुणो महो दिवोअपामूर्मौ सिन्धुष्वन्तरुक्षितः|	earths central point sustainer of the mighty heavens distilled into the streams into the waters wave.
इन्द्रस्य वज्रो वर्षभो विभूवसुः सोमो हर्देपवते चारु मत्सरः|	as indras thunderbolt steer with farspreading wealth soma is flowing on to make the heart rejoice.
स तू पवस्व परि पार्थिवं रज सतोत्रे शिक्षन्नाधून्वते च सुक्रतो|	over the earthly region flow thou on thy way helping the praiser and the pourer thou most wise.
मा नो निर्भाग वसुनः सादनस्प्र्शो रयिं पिशङगं बहुलं वसीमहि|	let us not lack rich treasure reaching to our home and may we clothe ourselves in manifold bright wealth.
आ तू न इन्दो शतदात्वश्व्यं सहस्रदातु पशुमद धिरण्यवत|	hither o indu unto us a hundred gifts of steeds a thousand gifts of cattle and of gold.
उप मास्व बर्हती रेवतीरिषोअधि सतोत्रस्य पवमान नो गहि|	measure thou forth yea splendid ample strengthening food do thou o pavamana heed this laud of ours.
अचोदसो नो धन्वन्त्विन्दवः पर सुवानासो बर्हद्दिवेषु हरयः|	spontaneous let our drops of soma juice flow on pressed goldenhued among the gods of lofty heaven.
वि च नशन न इषो अरातयोअर्यो नशन्त सनिषन्त नो धियः|	perish among us they who give no gifts of food perish the godless may our prayers obtain success.
पर णो धन्वन्त्विन्दवो मदच्युतो धना वा येभिरर्वतो जुनीमसि|	forward to us the drops distilling meath shall flow like riches for whose sake we urge the horses on.
तिरो मर्तस्य कस्य चित परिह्व्र्तिं वयं धनानि विश्वधा भरेमहि|	beyond the crafty hindering of all mortal men may we continually bear precious wealth away.
उत सवस्या अरात्या अरिर्हि ष उतान्यस्या अरात्या वर्को हि षः|	yea yerily foe of hate shown to himself is he yea verity destroyer too of other hate.
धन्वन न तर्ष्णा समरीत तानभि सोम जहिपवमान दुराध्यः|	as thirst subdueth in the desert conquer thou o soma pavarnana men of evil thoughts.
दिवि ते नाभा परमो य आददे पर्थिव्यास्ते रुरुहुः सानविक्षिपः|	near kin to thee is he raised loftiest in the heavens upon the earths high ridge thy scions have grown forth.
अद्रयस्त्वा बप्सति गोरधि तवच्यप्सु तवा हस्तैर्दुदुहुर्मनीषिणः|	the pressstones chew and crunch thee on the oxs hide sages have milked thee with their hands into the streams.
एवा त इन्दो सुभ्वं सुपेशसं रसं तुञ्जन्ति परथमा अभिश्रियः|	so do they hurry on thy strong and beauteous juice o indu as the first ingredient of the draught.
निदंनिदं पवमान नि तारिष आविस्ते शुष्मो भवतु परियो मदः|	bring low thou pavamana every single foe and be thy might shown forth as sweet and gladdening drink.
परि सोम रतं बर्हदाशुः पवित्रे अर्षति|	swift to the purifying sieve flows soma as exalted law.
विघ्नन रक्षांसि देवयुः|	slaying the fiends loving the gods.
यत सोमो वाजमर्षति शतं धारा अपस्युवः|	when soma pours the strengthening food a hundred everactive streams.
इन्द्रस्यसख्यमाविशन|	to indras friendship win theirway.
अभि तवा योषणो दश जारं न कन्यानूषत|	ten dames have sung to welcome thee even as a maiden greets her love.
मर्ज्यसे सोम सातये|	o soma thou art decked to win.
तवमिन्द्राय विष्णवे सवादुरिन्दो परि सरव|	flow hitherward o indu sweet to indra and to viṣṇu guard.
नॄन सतोतॄन्पाह्यंहसः|	the men the singers from distress.
पर कविर्देववीतयेअव्यो वारेभिरर्षति|	forth through the strainingcloth the sage flows to the banquet of the gods.
साह्वान विश्वाभि सप्र्धः|	subduing all our enemies.
स हि षमा जरित्र्भ्य आ वाजं गोमन्तमिन्वति|	for he as pavamana sends thousandfold treasure in the shape.
पवमानः सहस्रिणम|	of cattle to the singingmen.
परि विश्वानि चेतसा मर्शसे पवसे मती|	thou graspest all things with thy mind and purifiest thee with thoughts.
स नः सोम शरवो विदः|	as such o soma find us fame.
अभ्यर्ष बर्हद यशो मघवद्भ्यो धरुवं रयिम|	pour lofty glory on us send sure riches to our liberal lords.
इषं सतोत्र्भ्य आ भर|	bring food to those who sing thy praise.
तवं राजेव सुव्रतो गिरः सोमा विवेशिथ|	as thou art cleansed o wondrous steed o soma thou hast entered like.
पुनानो वह्ने अद्भुत|	a pious king into the songs.
स वह्निरप्सु दुष्टरो मर्ज्यमानो गभस्त्योः|	he soma like a courser in the floods invincible made clean.
सोमश्चमूषु सीदति|	with hands is resting in the jars.
करीळुर्मखो न मंहयुः पवित्रं सोम गछसि|	disporting like a liberal chief thou goest soma to the sieve.
दधत सतोत्रे सुवीर्यम|	lending the laud a heros strength.
स सुतः पीतये वर्षा सोमः पवित्रे अर्षति|	soma the steer effused for draught flows to the purifying sieve.
विघ्नन रक्षांसि देवयुः|	slaying the fiends loving the gods.
स पवित्रे विचक्षणो हरिरर्षति धर्णसिः|	farsighted tawnycoloured he flows to the sieve intelligent.
अभि योनिंकनिक्रदत|	bellowing to his place of rest.
स वाजी रोचना दिवः पवमानो वि धावति|	this vigorous pavamana runs forth to the luminous realm of heaven.
रक्षोहा वारमव्ययम|	fiendslayer through the fleecy sieve.
स तरितस्याधि सानवि पवमानो अरोचयत|	this payamana up above tritas high ridge hath made the sun.
जामिभिः सूर्यं सह|	together with the sisters shine.
स वर्त्रहा वर्षा सुतो वरिवोविददाभ्यः|	this vṛtraslaying steer effused soma roomgiver neer deceived.
सोमो वाजमिवासरत|	hath gone as twere to win the spoil.
स देवः कविनेषितोअभि दरोणानि धावति|	urged onward by the sage the god speeds forward to the casks of wood.
इन्दुरिन्द्रायमंहना|	indu to indra willingly.
परि सुवानो हरिरंशुः पवित्रे रथो न सर्जि सनये हियानः|	the goldhued juice poured out upon the filter is started like a car sent forth to conquer.
आपच्छ्लोकमिन्द्रियं पूयमानः परति देवानजुषत परयोभिः|	he hath gained song and vigour while they cleansed him and hath rejoiced the gods with entertainments.
अछा नर्चक्षा असरत पवित्रे नाम दधानः कविरस्य योनौ|	he who beholdeth man hath reached the filter bearing his name the sage hath sought his dwelling.
सीदन होतेव सदने चमूषूपेमग्मन्न्र्षयः सप्त विप्राः|	the Ṛṣis came to him seven holy singers when in the bowls he settled as invoker.
पर सुमेधा गातुविद विश्वदेवः सोमः पुनानः सद एति नित्यम|	shared by all gods mobt wise propitious soma goes while they cleanse him to his constant station.
भुवद विश्वेषु काव्येषु रन्तानु जनान यतते पञ्च धीरः|	let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom to the five tribes the sage attains with labour.
तव तये सोम पवमान निण्ये विश्वे देवास्त्रय एकादशासः|	in thy mysterious place o pavamana soma are all the gods the thriceeleven.
दश सवधाभिरधि सानो अव्ये मर्जन्ति तवा नद्यः सप्त यह्वीः|	ten on the fleecy height themselves selfprompted and seven fresh rivers brighten and adorn thee.
तन नु सत्यं पवमानस्यास्तु यत्र विश्वे कारवः संनसन्त|	now let this be the truth of pavamana there where all singers gather them together.
जयोतिर्यदह्ने अक्र्णोदु लोकं परावन मनुं दस्यवे करभीकम|	that he hath given us room and made the daylight hath holpen manu and repelled the dasyu.
परि सद्मेव पशुमान्ति होता राजा न सत्यः समितीरियानः|	as the priest seeks the station rich in cattle like a true king who goes to great assemblies.
सोमः पुनानः कलशानयासीत सीदन मर्गो न महिषो वनेषु|	soma hath sought the beakers while they cleansed him and like a wild bull in the wood hath settled.
पर धारा अस्य शुष्मिणो वर्था पवित्रे अक्षरन|	streams of this potent one have flowed easily to the strainingcloth.
पुनानो वाचमिष्यति|	while he is cleansed he lifts his voice.
इन्दुर्हियानः सोत्र्भिर्म्र्ज्यमानः कनिक्रदत|	indu by pressers urged to speed bellowing out while beautified.
इयर्ति वग्नुमिन्द्रियम|	sends forth a very mighty sound.
आ नः शुष्मं नर्षाह्यं वीरवन्तं पुरुस्प्र्हम|	pour on us soma with thy stream manconquering might which many crave.
पवस्व सोम धारया|	accompanied with hero sons.
पर सोमो अति धारया पवमानो असिष्यदत|	hither hath pavamana flowed soma flowed hither in a stream.
अभि दरोणान्यासदम|	to settle in the vats of wood.
अप्सु तवा मधुमत्तमं हरिं हिन्वन्त्यद्रिभिः|	to waters with the stones they drive thee tawnyhued most rich in sweets.
इन्दविन्द्राय पीतये|	o indu to be indras drink.
सुनोता मधुमत्तमं सोममिन्द्राय वज्रिणे|	for indra for the thunderer press the soma very rich in sweets.
चारुं शर्धाय मत्सरम|	lovely inspiriting for strength.
परो सय वह्निः पथ्याभिरस्यान दिवो न वर्ष्टिः पवमानोक्षाः|	this chariothorse hath moved along the pathways and pavamana flowed like rain from heaven.
सहस्रधारो असदन नयस्मे मातुरुपस्थे वन आच सोमः|	with us hath soma with a thousand currents sunk in the wood upon his mothers bosom.
राजा सिन्धूनामवसिष्ट वास रतस्य नावमारुहद रजिष्ठाम|	king he hath clothed him in the robe of rivers mounted the straightestgoing ship of order.
अप्सु दरप्सो वाव्र्धे शयेनजूतो दुह ईं पिता दुह ईं पितुर्जाम|	sped by the hawk the drop hath waxed in waters the father drains it drains the fathers offspring.
सिंहं नसन्त मध्वो अयासं हरिमरुषं दिवो अस्य पतिम|	they come to him red tawny lord of heaven the watchful guardian of the meath the lion.
शूरो युत्सु परथमः पर्छते गा अस्य चक्षसा परि पात्युक्षा|	first hero in the fight he seeks the cattle and with his eye the steer is our protector.
मधुप्र्ष्ठं घोरमयासमश्वं रथे युञ्जन्त्युरुचक्रर्ष्वम|	they harness to the broadwheeled car the mighty courser whose back bears meath unwearied awful.
सवसार ईं जामयो मर्जयन्ति सनाभयो वाजिनमूर्जयन्ति|	the twins the sisters brighten him and strengthenthese children of one damethe vigorous racer.
चतस्र ईं घर्तदुहः सचन्ते समाने अन्तर्धरुणे निषत्ताः|	four pouring out the holy oil attend him sitting together in the same container.
ता ईमर्षन्ति नमसा पुनानास्ता ईं विश्वतः परि षन्ति पूर्वीः|	to him they flow when purified with homage and still from every side are first about him.
विष्टम्भो दिवो धरुणः पर्थिव्या विश्वा उत कषितयो हस्ते अस्य|	he is the buttress of the heavens supporter of earth and in his hand are all the people.
असत त उत्सो गर्णते नियुत्वान मध्वो अंशुः पवतैन्द्रियाय|	be the teams lord a well to thee the singer cleansed is the sweet plants stalk for deed of glory.
वन्वन्नवातो अभि देववीतिमिन्द्राय सोम वर्त्रहा पवस्व|	fighting uninjured come where gods are feasted soma as vitraslayer flow for indra.
शग्धि महः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य रायः सुवीर्यस्य पतयः सयाम|	vouchsafe us ample riches very splendid may we be masters of heroic vigour.
एते सोमास आशवो रथा इव पर वाजिनः|	these rapid somastreams have stirred themselves to motion like strong steeds.
सर्गाः सर्ष्टा अहेषत|	like cars like armies hurried forth.
एते वाता इवोरवः पर्जन्यस्येव वर्ष्टयः|	swift as wide winds they lightly move like rainstorms of parjanya like.
अग्नेरिव भरमा वर्था|	the flickering flames of burning fire.
एते पूता विपश्चितः सोमासो दध्याशिरः|	these soma juices blent with curds purified skilled in sacred hymns.
विपा वयानशुर्धियः|	have gained by song their heartsdesire.
एते मर्ष्टा अमर्त्याः सस्र्वांसो न शश्रमुः|	immortal cleansed these drops since first they flowed have never wearied fain.
इयक्षन्तः पथो रजः|	to reach the regions and their paths.
एते पर्ष्ठानि रोदसोर्विप्रयन्तो वयानशुः|	advancing they have travelled oer the ridges of the earth and heaven.
उतेदमुत्तमं रजः|	and this the highest realm of all.
तन्तुं तन्वानमुत्तममनु परवत आशत|	over the heights have they attained the highest thread that is spun out.
उतेदमुत्तमाय्यम|	and this which must be deemed most high.
तवं सोम पणिभ्य आ वसु गव्यानि धारयः|	thou soma boldest wealth in kine which thou hast seized from niggard churls.
ततं तन्तुमचिक्रदः|	thou calledst forth the outspun thread.
नानानं वा उ नो धियो वि वरतानि जनानाम|	we all have various thoughts and plans and diverse are the ways of men.
तक्षा रिष्टं रुतं भिषग बरह्मा सुन्वन्तमिछतीन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	the brahman seeks the worshipper wright seeks the cracked and leech the maimed flow indu flow for indras sake.
जरतीभिरोषधीभिः पर्णेभिः शकुनानाम|	the smith with ripe and seasoned plants with feathers of the birds of air.
कार्मारो अश्मभिर्द्युभिर्हिरण्यवन्तमिछतीन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	with stones and with enkindled flames seeks him who hath a store of gold flow indu flow for indras sake.
कारुरहं ततो भिषगुपलप्रक्षिणी नना|	a bard am i my dads a leech mammy lays corn upon the stones.
नानाधियोवसूयवोअनु गा इव तस्थिमेन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	striving for wealth with varied plans we follow our desires like kine flow indu flow for indras sake.
अश्वो वोळ्हा सुखं रथं हसनामुपमन्त्रिणः|	the horse would draw an easy car gay hosts attract the laugh and jest.
शेपो रोमण्वन्तौ भेदौ वारिन मण्डूक इछतीन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	the male desires his mates approach the frog is eager for the flood flow indu flow for indras sake.
अधि यदस्मिन वाजिनीव शुभ सपर्धन्ते धियः सूर्ये नविशः|	when beauties strive for him as for a charger then strive the songs like soldiers for the sunlight.
अपो वर्णानः पवते कवीयन वरजं न पशुवर्धनाय मन्म|	acting the sage he flows enrobed in waters and song as twere a stall that kine may prosper.
दविता वयूर्ण्वन्नम्र्तस्य धाम सवर्विदे भुवनानि परथन्त|	the worlds expand to hirn who from aforetime found light to spread the law of life eternal.
धियः पिन्वानाः सवसरे न गाव रतायन्तीरभि वावश्र इन्दुम|	the swelling songs like kine within the stable in deep devotion call aloud on indu.
परि यत कविः काव्या भरते शूरो न रथो भुवनानि विश्वा|	when the sage bears his holy wisdom round him like a car visiting all worlds the hero.
देवेषु यशो मर्ताय भूषन दक्षाय रायः पुरुभूषु नव्यः|	becoming fame mid gods unto the mortal wealth to the skilled worth praise mid the everpresent.
शरिये जातः शरिय आ निरियाय शरियं वयो जरित्र्भ्यो दधाति|	for glory born be hath come forth to glory he giveth life and glory to the singers.
शरियं वसाना अम्र्तत्वमायन भवन्ति सत्या समिथा मितद्रौ|	they clothed in glory have become immortal he measured in his course makes frays successful.
इषमूर्जमभ्यर्षाश्वं गामुरु जयोतिः कर्णुहि मत्सि देवान|	stream to us food and vigour kine and horses give us broad lights and fill thgods with rapture.
विश्वानि हि सुषहा तानि तुभ्यं पवमान बाधसेसोम शत्रून|	all ther are easy things for thee to master thou pavamana soma quellest foemen.
जनयन रोचना दिवो जनयन्नप्सु सूर्यम|	engendering the sun in floods engendering heavens lights greenhued.
वसानो गा अपोहरिः|	robed in the waters and the milk.
एष परत्नेन मन्मना देवो देवेभ्यस परि|	according to primeval plan this soma with his stream effused.
धारया पवते सुतः|	flows purely on a god for gods.
वाव्र्धानाय तूर्वये पवन्ते वाजसातये|	for him victorious waxen great the juices with a thousand powers.
सोमाः सहस्रपाजसः|	are purified for winning spoil.
दुहानः परत्नमित पयः पवित्रे परि षिच्यते|	shedding the ancient fluid he is poured into the cleansing sieve.
करन्दन देवानजीजनत|	he thundering hath produced the gods.
अभि विश्वानि वार्याभि देवान रताव्र्धः|	soma while purifying sends hither all things to be desired.
सोमः पुनानोर्षति|	he sends the gods who strengthen law.
गोमन नः सोम वीरवदश्वावद वाजवत सुतः|	soma effused pour on us wealth in kine in heroes steeds and spoil.
पवस्व बर्हतीरिषः|	send us abundant store of food.
आशुरर्ष बर्हन्मते परि परियेण धाम्ना|	flow on o thou of lofty thought flow swift in thy beloved form.
यत्र देवा इतिब्रवन|	saying i go where dwell the gods.
परिष्क्र्ण्वन्ननिष्क्र्तं जनाय यातयन्निषः|	preparing what is unprepared and bringing store of food to man.
वर्ष्टिन्दिवः परि सरव|	make thou the rain descend from heaven.
सुत एति पवित्र आ तविषिं दधान ओजसा|	with might bestowing power thejuice enters the purifying sieve.
विचक्षाणो विरोचयन|	farseeing sending forth its light.
अयं स यो दिवस परि रघुयामा पवित्र आ|	this is it which in rapid course hath with the rivers wave flowed down.
सिन्धोरूर्मा वयक्षरत|	from heaven upon the straining cloth.
आविवासन परावतो अथो अर्वावतः सुतः|	inviting him frorh far away and even from near at hand the juice.
इन्द्राय सिच्यतेमधु|	for indra is poured forth as meath.
समीचीना अनूषत हरिं हिन्वन्त्यद्रिभिः|	in union they have sung the hymn with stones they urge the tawny one.
योनाव रतस्य सीदत|	sit in the place of sacrifice.
एष वाजी हितो नर्भिर्विश्वविन मनसस पतिः|	urged by the men this vigorous steed lord of the mind omniscient.
अव्यो वारं वि धावति|	runs to the woollen strainingcloth.
एष पवित्रे अक्षरत सोमो देवेभ्यः सुतः|	within the filter hath he flowed this soma for the gods effused.
विश्वा धामान्याविशन|	entering all their essences.
एष देवः शुभायतेअधि योनावमर्त्यः|	he shines in beauty there this god immortal in his dwellingplace.
वर्त्रहा देववीतमः|	foeslayer dearest to the gods.
एष वर्षा कनिक्रदद दशभिर्जामिभिर्यतः|	directed by the sisters ten bellowing on his way this steer.
अभि दरोणानि धावति|	runs onward to the wooden vats.
एष सूर्यमरोचयत पवमानो विचर्षणिः|	this pavamana swiftand strong omniscient gave spleudour to.
विश्वा धामानि विश्ववित|	the sun and all his forms of light.
एष शुष्म्यदाभ्यः सोमः पुनानो अर्षति|	this soma being purified flows mighty and infallible.
देवावीरघशंसहा|	slayer of sinners dear togods.
असर्जि रथ्यो यथा पवित्रे चम्वोः सुतः|	forth from the mortar is the juice sent like a carhorse to the sieve.
कार्ष्मन वाजीन्यक्रमीत|	the steed steps forward to the goal.
स वह्निः सोम जाग्र्विः पवस्व देववीरति|	thus soma watchful bearing well cheering the gods flow past the sieve.
अभि कोशं मधुश्चुतम|	turned to the vat that drops with meath.
स नो जयोतींषि पूर्व्य पवमान वि रोचय|	excellent pavamana make the lights shine brightly out for us.
करत्वे दक्षायनो हिनु|	speed us to mental power and skill.
शुम्भमानो रतायुभिर्म्र्ज्यमानो गभस्त्योः|	he beautified by pious men and coming from their hands adorned.
पवते वारे अव्यये|	flows through the fleecy strainingcloth.
स विश्वा दाशुषे वसु सोमो दिव्यानि पार्थिवा|	may soma pour all treasures of the heavens the earth the firmament.
पवतामान्तरिक्ष्या|	upon the liberal worshipper.
आ दिवस पर्ष्ठमश्वयुर्गव्ययुः सोम रोहसि|	thou mountest to the height of heaven o soma seeking steeds and kine.
वीरयुः शवसस पते|	and seeking heroes lord of strength.
यो अत्य इव मर्ज्यते गोभिर्मदाय हर्यतः|	we will enrobe with sacred song the lovely one who as a steed.
तं गीर्भिर्वासयामसि|	is decked with milk for rapturous joy.
तं नो विश्वा अवस्युवो गिरः शुम्भन्ति पूर्वथा|	all songs of ours desiring grace adorn him in the ancient way.
इन्दुमिन्द्राय पीतये|	indu for indra for his drink.
पुनानो याति हर्यतः सोमो गीर्भिः परिष्क्र्तः|	soma flows on when purified beloved and adorned with songs.
विप्रस्य मेध्यातिथेः|	songs of the sage medhyātithi.
पवमान विदा रयिमस्मभ्यं सोम सुश्रियम|	o soma pavamana find exceeding glorious wealth for us.
इन्दो सहस्रवर्चसम|	wealth indu fraught with boundless might.
इन्दुरत्यो न वाजस्र्त कनिक्रन्ति पवित्र आ|	like courser racing to the prize indu the lover of the gods.
यदक्षारति देवयुः|	roars as he passes in the sieve.
पवस्व वाजसातये विप्रस्य गर्णतो वर्धे|	flow on thy way to win us strength to speed the sage who praises thee.
सोम रास्व सुवीर्यम|	soma bestow heroic power.
पर सवानासो रथा इवार्वन्तो न शरवस्यवः|	like cars that thunder on their way like coursers eager for renown.
सोमासो राये अक्रमुः|	have somadrops flowed forth for wealth.
हिन्वानासो रथा इव दधन्विरे गभस्त्योः|	forth have they rushed from holding hands like chariots that are urged to speed.
भरासः कारिणाम इव|	like joyful songs of singingmen.
राजानो न परशस्तिभिः सोमासो गोभिर अञ्जते|	the somas deck themselves with milk as kings are graced with eulogies.
यज्ञो न सप्त धात्र्भिः|	and with seven priests the sacrifice.
परि सुवानास इन्दवो मदाय बर्हणा गिरा|	pressed for the gladdening draught the drops flow forth abundantly with song.
सुता अर्षन्ति धारया|	the soma juices in a stream.
आपानासो विवस्वतो जनन्त उषसो भगम|	winning vivasvāns glory and producing mornings light the suns.
सूरा अण्वं वि तन्वते|	pass through the openings of the cloth.
अप दवारा मतीनाम परत्ना रण्वन्ति कारवः|	the singingmen of ancient time open the doors of sacred songs.
वर्ष्णो हरस आयवः|	men for the mighty to accept.
समीचीनास आसते होतारः सप्तजामयः|	combined in close society sit the seven priests the brotherhood.
पदम एकस्य पिप्रतः|	filling the station of the one.
नाभा नाभिं न आ ददे चक्षुश चित सूर्ये सचा|	he gives us kinship with the gods and with the sun unites our eye.
कवेर अपत्यम आ दुहे|	the sages ofrspring hath appeared.
अभि परिया दिवस पदम अध्वर्युभिर गुहा हितम|	the sun with his dear eye beholds that quarter of the heavens which priests.
सूरः पश्यति चक्षसा|	have placed within the sacred cell.
पर सोमासो विपश्चितोअपां न यन्त्यूर्मयः|	like waves of waters skilled in song the juices of the soma speed.
वनानि महिषा इव|	onward as buffaloes to woods.
अभि दरोणानि बभ्रवः शुक्रा रतस्य धारया|	with stream of sacrifice the brown bright drops have flowed with strength in store.
वाजं गोमन्तमक्षरन|	of kine into the wooden vats.
सुता इन्द्राय वायवे वरुणाय मरुद्भ्यः|	to indra vāyu varuṇa to viṣṇu and the maruts flow.
सोमा अर्षन्ति विष्णवे|	the drops of soma juice effused.
तिस्रो वाच उदीरते गावो मिमन्ति धेनवः|	three several words are uttered kine are owing cows who give their milk.
हरिरेति कनिक्रदत|	the tawnyhued goes bellowing on.
अभि बरह्मीरनूषत यह्वीरतस्य मातरः|	the young and sacred mothers of the holy rite have uttered praise.
मर्म्र्ज्यन्ते दिवः शिशुम|	they decorate the child of heaven.
रायः समुद्रांश्चतुरोअस्मभ्यं सोम विश्वतः|	from every side o soma for our profit pour thou forth four seas.
आ पवस्व सहस्रिणः|	filled full of riches thousandfold.
शर्यणावति सोममिन्द्रः पिबतु वर्त्रहा|	let vṛtraslaying indra drink soma by Śaryaṇāvāns side.
बलं दधान आत्मनि करिष्यन वीर्यं महदिन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	storing up vigour in his heart prepared to do heroic deeds flow indu flow for indras sake.
आ पवस्व दिशां पत आर्जीकात सोम मीढ्वः|	lord of the quarters flow thou on boon soma from arjika land.
रतवाकेन सत्येन शरद्धया तपसा सुत इन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	effused with ardour and with faith and the true hymn of sacrifice flow indu flow for indras sake.
पर्जन्यव्र्द्धं महिषं तं सूर्यस्य दुहिताभरत|	hither hath sūryas daughter brought the wild steer whom parjanya nursed.
तं गन्धर्वाः परत्यग्र्भ्णन तं सोमे रसमादधुरिन्द्रायेन्दोपरि सरव|	gandharvas have seized bold of him and in the soma laid the juice flow indu flow for indras sake.
रतं वदन्न्र्तद्युम्न सत्यं वदन सत्यकर्मन|	splendid by law declaring law truthspeaking truthful in thy works.
शरद्धां वदन सोम राजन धात्रा सोम परिष्क्र्त इन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	enouncing faith king soma thou o soma whom thy maker decks flow indu flow for indras sake.
सत्यमुग्रस्य बर्हतः सं सरवन्ति संस्रवाः|	together flow the meeting streams of him the great and truly strong.
सं यन्ति रसिनो रसाः पुनानो बरह्मणा हर इन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	the juices of the juicy meet made pure by prayer o goldenhued flow indu flow for indras sake.
यत्र बरह्मा पवमान छन्दस्यां वाचं वदन|	o pavamana where the priest as he recites the rhythmic prayer.
गराव्णा सोमे महीयते सोमेनानन्दं जनयन्निन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	lords it oer soma with the stone with soma bringing forth delight flow indu flow for indras sake.
यत्र जयोतिरजस्रं यस्मिन लोके सवर्हितम|	o pavarnana place me in that deathless undecaying world.
तस्मिन मां धेहि पवमानाम्र्ते लोके अक्षित इन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	wherein the light of heaven is set and everlasting lustre shines flow indu flow for indras sake.
यत्र राजा वैवस्वतो यत्रावरोधनं दिवः|	make me immortal in that realm where dwells the king vivasvāns son.
यत्रामूर्यह्वतीरापस्तत्र मामम्र्तं कर्धीन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	where is the secret shrine of heaven where are those waters young and fresh flow indu flow for indras sake.
यत्रानुकामं चरणं तरिनाके तरिदिवे दिवः|	make me immortal in that realm where they move even as they list.
लोका यत्र जयोतिष्मन्तस्तत्र मामम्र्तं कर्धीन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	in the third sphere of inmost heaven where lucid worlds are full of light flow indu flow for indras sake.
यत्र कामा निकामाश्च यत्र बरध्नस्य विष्टपम|	make me immortal in that realm of eager wish and strong desire.
सवधा च यत्र तर्प्तिश्च तत्र मामम्र्तं कर्धीन्द्रायेन्दो परिस्रव|	the region of the radiant moon where food and full delight are found flow indu flow for indras sake.
यत्रानन्दाश्च मोदाश्च मुदः परमुद आसते|	make me immortal in that realm where happiness and transports where.
कामस्य यत्राप्ताः कामास्तत्र मामम्र्तं कर्धीन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	joys and felicities combine and longing wishes are fulfilled flow indu flow for indras sake.
पर्यू षु पर धन्व वाजसातये परि वर्त्राणि सक्षणिः|	oerpowering vṛtras forward run to win great strength.
दविषस्तरध्या रणया न ईयसे|	thou speedest to subdue like one exacting debts.
अनु हि तवा सुतं सोम मदामसि महे समर्यराज्ये|	in thee effused o soma we rejoice ourselves for great supremacy in fight.
वाजानभि पवमान पर गाहसे|	thou pavamana enterest into mighty deeds.
अजीजनो हि पवमान सूर्यं विधारे शक्मना पयः|	o pavamana thou didst generate the sun and spread the moisture out with power.
गोजीरया रंहमानः पुरन्ध्या|	hasting to us with plenty vivified with milk.
अजीजनो अम्र्त मर्त्येष्वा रतस्य धर्मन्नम्र्तस्य चारुणः|	thou didst produce him deathless god mid mortal men for maintenance of law and lovely amṛta.
सदासरो वाजमछा सनिष्यदत|	thou evermore hast moved making strength flow to us.
अभ्यअभि हि शरवसा ततर्दिथोत्सं न कं चिज्जनपानमक्षितम|	all round about hast thou with glory pierced for us as twere a neverfailing well for men to drink.
शर्याभिर्न भरमाणो गभस्त्योः|	borne on thy way in fragments from the pressers arms.
आदीं के चित पश्यमानास आप्यं वसुरुचो दिव्या अभ्यनूषत|	then beautifully radiant certain heavenly ones have sung to him their kinship as they looked thereon.
वारं न देवः सविता वयूर्णुते|	and savitar the god opens as twere a stall.
तवे सोम परथमा वर्क्तबर्हिषो महे वाजाय शरवसे धियन्दधुः|	soma the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the hymn to thee for mighty strength and for renown.
स तवं नो वीर वीर्याय चोदय|	so hero urge us onward to heroic power.
दिवः पीयूषं पूर्व्यं यदुक्थ्यं महो गाहाद दिव आनिरधुक्षत|	they have drained forth from out the great depth of the sky the old primeval milk of heaven that claims the laud.
इन्द्रमभि जायमानं समस्वरन|	they lifted up their voice to indra athis birth.
अध यदिमे पवमान रोदसी इमा च विश्वा भुवनाभि मज्मना|	as long as thou o pavamana art above this earth and heaven and all existence in thy might.
यूथे न निष्ठा वर्षभो वि तिष्ठसे|	thou standest like a bull the chief amid the herd.
सोमः पुनानो अव्यये वारे शिशुर्न करीळन पवमानो अक्षाः|	in the sheeps wool hath soma pavamana flowed while they cleanse him like a playful infant.
सहस्रधारः शतवाज इन्दुः|	indu with hundred powers and hundred currents.
एष पुनानो मधुमान रतावेन्द्रायेन्दुः पवते सवादुरूर्मिः|	holy and sweet while purified this indu flows on a wave of pleasant taste to indra.
वाजसनिर्वरिवोविद वयोधाः|	strengthwinner treasurefinder life bestower.
स पवस्व सहमानः पर्तन्यून सेधन रक्षांस्यप दुर्गहाणि|	so flow thou on subduing our assailants chasing the demons hard to beencountered.
सवायुधः सासह्वान सोम शत्रून|	wellarmed and conquering our foes o soma.
पर ण इन्दो महे तन ऊर्मिं न बिभ्रदर्षसि|	indu to us for this great rite bearing as twere thy wave to gods.
अभि देवानयास्यः|	unwearied thou art flowing forqh.
मती जुष्टो धिया हितः सोमो हिन्वे परावति|	pleased with the hymn impelled by prayer soma is hurried far away.
विप्रस्य धारया कविः|	the wise one in the singers stream.
अयं देवेषु जाग्र्विः सुत एति पवित्र आ|	watchful among the gods this juice advances to the cleansing sieve.
सोमो याति विचर्षणिः|	soma most active travels on.
स नः पवस्व वाजयुश्चक्राणश्चारुमध्वरम|	flow onward seeking strength for us embellishing the sacrifice.
बर्हिष्माना विवासति|	the priest with trimmed grass calleth thee.
स नो भगाय वायवे विप्रवीरः सदाव्र्धः|	may soma ever bringing power to bhaga and to vāyu sage.
सोमो देवेष्वा यमत|	and hero lead us to the gods.
स नो अद्य वसुत्तये करतुविद गातुवित्तमः|	so to increase our wealth today inspirer best of furtherers.
वाजं जेषि शरवो बर्हत|	win for us strength and high renown.
आ दक्षिणा सर्ज्यते शुष्म्यासदं वेति दरुहो रक्षसः पाति जाग्र्विः|	the guerdon is bestowed the mighty takes his seat and everwatchful guards from fiend and evil sprite.
हरिरोपशं कर्णुते नभस पय उपस्तिरे चम्वोर्ब्रह्म निर्णिजे|	goldhued he makes the cloud his diadem the milk his carpet in both worlds and prayer his robe of state.
पर करिष्टिहेव शूष एति रोरुवदसुर्यं वर्णं नि रिणीते अस्य तम|	strong bellowing he goes like one who slays the folk he lets this hue of asuras flow off from him.
जहाति वव्रिं पितुरेति निष्क्र्तमुपप्रुतं कर्णुते निर्णिजं तना|	throws off his covering seeks his fathers meetingplace and thus makes for himself the bright robe he assumes.
अद्रिभिः सुतः पवते गभस्त्योर्व्र्षायते नभसा वेपते मती|	onward he flows from both the hands pressed out with stones excited by the prayer the water makes him wild.
स मोदते नसते साधते गिरा नेनिक्ते अप्सु यजते परीमणि|	he frolics and draws near completes his work with song and bathes in streams to satisfy the worshipper.
परि दयुक्षं सहसः पर्वताव्र्धं मध्वः सिञ्चन्ति हर्म्यस्य सक्षणिम|	they pour out meath around the master of the house celestial strengthener of the mountain that gives might.
आ यस्मिन गावः सुहुताद ऊधनि मूर्धंछ्रीणन्त्यग्रियं वरीमभिः|	in whom through his great powers oblationeating cows in their uplifted udder mix their choicest milk.
समी रथं न भुरिजोरहेषत दश सवसारो अदितेरुपस्थ आ|	they the ten sisters on the lap of aditi have sent him forward like a car from both the arms.
जिगादुप जरयति गोरपीच्यं पदं यदस्य मतुथा अजीजनन|	he wanders and comes near the cows mysterious place even the place which his inventions have produced.
शयेनो न योनिं सदनं धिया कर्तं हिरण्ययमासदं देव एषति|	like as a falcon to his home so speeds the god to his own golden wiselytashioned place to rest.
ए रिणन्ति बर्हिषि परियं गिराश्वो न देवानप्येति यज्ञियः|	with song they urge the darling to the sacred grass the holy one goes like a courser to the gods.
परा वयक्तो अरुषो दिवः कविर्व्र्षा तरिप्र्ष्ठो अनविष्टगा अभि|	from far away from heaven the redhued noted sage steer of the triple height hath sung unto the kine.
सहस्रणीतिर्यतिः परायती रेभो न पूर्वीरुषसो वि राजति|	with thousand guidings he leading this way and that shines as a singer splendidly through many a morn.
तवेषं रूपं कर्णुते वर्णो अस्य स यत्राशयत सम्र्ता सेधति सरिधः|	his covering assumes a radiant hue whereer he comes into the fight he drives the foe afar.
अप्सा याति सवधया दैव्यं जनं सं सुष्टुती नसते सं गोग्रया|	the winner of the floods with food he seeks the host of heaven he comes to praises glorified with milk.
उक्षेव यूथा परियन्नरावीदधि तविषीरधित सूर्यस्य|	like a bull roaming round the herds he bellows he hath assumed the brilliancy of sūrya.
दिव्यः सुपर्णोअव चक्षत कषां सोमः परि करतुना पश्यते जाः|	down to the earth hath looked the heavenly falcon soma with wisdom views all living creatures.
तं तवा नर्म्णानि बिभ्रतं सधस्थेषु महो दिवः|	with sacrifice we seek to thee kind cherisher of manly might.
चारुं सुक्र्त्ययेमहे|	in mansions of the lofty heavens.
संव्र्क्तध्र्ष्णुमुक्थ्यं महामहिव्रतं मदम|	gladdening crusher of the bold ruling with very mighty sway.
शतं पुरो रुरुक्षणिम|	destroyer of a hundred forts.
अतस्त्वा रयिमभि राजानं सुक्रतो दिवः|	hence sapient one the falcon strong of wing unwearied brought thee down.
सुपर्णो अव्यथिर्भरत|	lord over riches from the sky.
विश्वस्मा इत सवर्द्र्शे साधारणं रजस्तुरम|	that each may see the light the bird brought us the guard of law the friend.
गोपां रतस्य विर्भरत|	of all the speeder through the air.
अधा हिन्वान इन्द्रियं जयायो महित्वमानशे|	and now sent forth it hath attained to mighty power and majesty.
अभिष्टिक्र्द्विचर्षणिः|	most active ready to assist.
अया सोमः सुक्र्त्यया महश्चिदभ्यवर्धत|	great as he was soma hath gained strength by this high solemnity.
मन्दान उद्व्र्षायते|	joyous he riseth like a bull.
कर्तानीदस्य कर्त्वा चेतन्ते दस्युतर्हणा|	his task is done his crushings of the dasyus are made manifest.
रणा च धर्ष्णुश्चयते|	he sternly reckoneth their debts.
आत सोम इन्द्रियो रसो वज्रः सहस्रसा भुवत|	soon as his song of praise is born the soma indras juice becomes.
उक्थं यदस्य जायते|	a thousandwinning thunderbolt.
सवयं कविर्विधर्तरि विप्राय रत्नमिछति|	seer and sustainer he himself desireth riches for the sage.
यदी मर्म्र्ज्यते धियः|	when he embellisheth his songs.
सिषासतू रयीणां वाजेष्वर्वतामिव|	fain would they both win riches as in races of the steeds in war.
भरेषु जिग्युषामसि|	thou art upon the conquerors side.
अभि परियाणि पवते चनोहितो नामानि यह्वो अधि येषु वर्धते|	graciouslyminded he is flowing on his way to win dear names oer which the youthful one grows great.
आ सूर्यस्य बर्हतो बर्हन्नधि रथं विष्वञ्चमरुहद विचक्षणः|	the mighty and farseeing one hath mounted now the mighty sūryas car which moves to every side.
रतस्य जिह्वा पवते मधु परियं वक्ता पतिर्धियो अस्या अदाभ्यः|	the speaker unassailable master of this hymn the tongue of sacrifice pours forth the pleasant meath.
दधाति पुत्रः पित्रोरपीच्यं नाम तर्तीयमधि रोचने दिवः|	within the lustrous region of the heavens the son makes the third secret name of mother and of sire.
अव दयुतानः कलशानचिक्रदन नर्भिर्येमानः कोश आ हिरण्यये|	sending forth flashes he hath bellowed to the jars led by the men into the golden reservoir.
अभीं रतस्य दोहना अनूषताधि तरिप्र्ष्ठ उषसो वि राजति|	the milky streams of sacrifice have sung to him he of the triple height shines brightly through the morns.
अद्रिभिः सुतो मतिभिश्चनोहितः पररोचयन रोदसी मातराशुचिः|	pressed by the stones with hymns and graciously inclined illuminating both the parents heaven and earth.
रोमाण्यव्या समया वि धावति मधोर्धारा पिन्वमाना दिवेदिवे|	he flows in ordered season onward through the flee a current of sweet juice still swelling day by day.
परि सोम पर धन्वा सवस्तये नर्भिः पुनानो अभि वासयाशिरम|	flow onward soma flow to bring prosperity cleansed by the men invest thee with the milky draught.
ये ते मदा आहनसो विहायसस्तेभिरिन्द्रं चोदय दातवे मघम|	what gladdening drinks thou hast foaming exceeding strong even with these incite indra to give us wealth.
धर्ता दिवः पवते कर्त्व्यो रसो दक्षो देवानामनुमाद्यो नर्भिः|	on flows the potent juice sustainer of the heavens the strength of gods whom men must hail with shouts of joy.
हरिः सर्जानो अत्यो न सत्वभिर्व्र्था पाजांसि कर्णुते नदीष्वा|	the goldhued started like a courser by brave men impetuously winneth splendour in the streams.
शूरो न धत्त आयुधा गभस्त्योः सवः सिषासन रथिरो गविष्टिषु|	he takes his weapons like a hero in his hands fain to win light carborne in forays for the kine.
इन्द्रस्य शुष्ममीरयन्नपस्युभिरिन्दुर्हिन्वानो अज्यते मनीषिभिः|	indu while stimulating indias might is urged forward and balmed by sages skilful in their task.
इन्द्रस्य सोम पवमान ऊर्मिणा तविष्यमाणो जठरेष्वाविश|	soma as thou art purified with flowing wave exhibiting thy strength enter thou indras throat.
पर णः पिन्व विद्युदभ्रेव रोदसी धिया न वाजानुप मासि शश्वतः|	make both worlds stream for us as lightning doth the clouds mete out exhaustless powers for us as twere through song.
विश्वस्य राजा पवते सवर्द्र्श रतस्य धीतिं रषिषाळ अवीवशत|	onward he flows the king of all that sees the light the Ṛṣis lord hath raised the song of sacrifice.
यः सूर्यस्यासिरेण मर्ज्यते पिता मतीनामसमष्टकाव्यः|	even he who is adorned with sūryas arrowy beam father of hymns whose wisdom is beyond our reach.
वर्षेव यूथा परि कोशमर्षस्यपामुपस्थे वर्षभः कनिक्रदत|	like as a bull to herds thou flowest to the pail bellowing as a steer upon the waters lap.
स इन्द्राय पवसे मत्सरिन्तमो यथा जेषाम समिथे तवोतयः|	so best of cheerers thou for indra flowest on that we with thy protection may oercome in fight.
मन्द्रया सोम धारया वर्षा पवस्व देवयुः|	soma flow on with pleasant stream a bull devoted to the gods.
अव्यो वारेष्वस्मयुः|	our friend unto the woollen sieve.
अभि तयं मद्यं मदमिन्दविन्द्र इति कषर|	pour hitherward as indras self indu that gladdening stream of thine.
अभि वाजिनोर्वतः|	and send us coursers full of strength.
अभि तयं पूर्व्यं मदं सुवानो अर्ष पवित्र आ|	flow to the filter hitherward pouring that ancient gladdening juice.
अभि वाजमुत शरवः|	streaming forth power and high renown.
अनु दरप्सास इन्दव आपो न परवतासरन|	hither the sparkling drops have flowed like waters down a steep descent.
पुनाना इन्द्रमाशत|	they have reached indra purified.
यमत्यमिव वाजिनं मर्जन्ति योषणो दश|	whom having passed the filter ten dames cleanse as twere a vigorous steed.
वने करीळन्तमत्यविम|	while he disports him in the wood.
तं गोभिर्व्र्षणं रसं मदाय देववीतये|	the steerstrong juice with milk pour forth for feast and service of the gods.
सुतं भराय सं सर्ज|	to him who bears away the draught.
देवो देवाय धारयेन्द्राय पवते सुतः|	effused the god flows onward with his stream to indra to the god.
पयो यदस्य पीपयत|	so that his milk may strengthen him.
आत्मा यज्ञस्य रंह्या सुष्वाणः पवते सुतः|	soul of the sacrifice the juice effused flows quickly on he keeps.
परत्नंनि पाति काव्यम|	his ancient wisdom of a sage.
एवा पुनान इन्द्रयुर्मदं मदिष्ठ वीतये|	so pouring forth as indras friend strong drink best gladdener for the feast.
गुहा चिद दधिषे गिरः|	thou even in secret storest hymns.
पवित्रं ते विततं बरह्मणस पते परभुर्गात्राणि पर्येषिविश्वतः|	spread is thy cleansing filter brahmaṇaspati as prince thou enterest its limbs from every side.
अतप्ततनूर्न तदामो अश्नुते शर्तास इद वहन्तस्तत समाशत|	the raw whose mass hath not been heated gains not this they only which are dressed which bear attain to it.
तपोष पवित्रं विततं दिवस पदे शोचन्तो अस्य तन्तवो वयस्थिरन|	high in the seat of heaven is spread the scorchers sieve its threads are standing separate glittering with light.
अवन्त्यस्य पवीतारमाशवो दिवस पर्ष्ठमधितिष्ठन्ति चेतसा|	the swift ones favour him who purifieth this with consciousness they stand upon the height of heaven.
अरूरुचदुषसः पर्श्निरग्रिय उक्षा बिभर्ति भुवनानि वाजयुः|	the foremost spotted steer hath made the mornings shine and yearning after strength sustains all things that be.
मायाविनो ममिरे अस्य मायया नर्चक्षसः पितरो गर्भमा दधुः|	by his high wisdom have the mighty sages wrought the fathers who behold mankind laid down the germ.
गन्धर्व इत्था पदमस्य रक्षति पाति देवानां जनिमान्यद्भुतः|	gandharva verily protects his dwellingplace wondrous he guards the generations of the gods.
गर्भ्णाति रिपुं निधया निधापतिः सुक्र्त्तमा मधुनो भक्षमाशत|	lord of the snare he takes the foeman with the snare those who are most devout have gained a share of meath.
हविर्हविष्मो महि सद्म दैव्यं नभो वसानः परि यास्यध्वरम|	rich in oblations robed in cloud thou corapassest oblation sacrifice the mighty seat of gods.
राजा पवित्ररथो वाजमारुहः सहस्रभ्र्ष्टिर्जयसि शरवो बर्हत|	king on thy chariotsieve thou goest up to war and with a thousand weapons winnest lofty fame.
असावि सोमो अरुषो वर्षा हरी राजेव दस्मो अभि गा अचिक्रदत|	even as a king hath soma red and tawny bull been pressed the wondrous one hath bellowed to the kine.
पुनानो वारं पर्येत्यव्ययं शयेनो न योनिं घर्तवन्तमासदम|	while purified he passes through the filtering fleece to seat him hawklike on the place that drops with oil.
कविर्वेधस्या पर्येषि माहिनमत्यो न मर्ष्टो अभि वाजमर्षसि|	to glory goest thou sage with disposing skill like a groomed steed thou rusbest forward to the prize.
अपसेधन दुरिता सोम मर्ळय घर्तं वसानः परियासि निर्णिजम|	o soma be thou gracious driving off distress thou goest clothed in butter to a robe of state.
पर्जन्यः पिता महिषस्य पर्णिनो नाभा पर्थिव्या गिरिषुक्षयं दधे|	parjanya is the father of the mighty bird on mountains in earths centre hath he made his home.
सवसार आपो अभि गा उतासरन सं गरावभिर्नसते वीते अध्वरे|	the waters too have flowed the sisters to the kine he meets the pressingstones at the beloved rite.
जायेव पत्यावधि शेव मंहसे पज्राया गर्भ शर्णुहि बरवीमि ते|	thou givest pleasure as a wife delights her lord listen o child of pajri for to thee i speak.
अन्तर्वाणीषु पर चरा सु जीवसेअनिन्द्यो वर्जने सोम जाग्र्हि|	amid the holy songs go on that we may live in time of trouble soma watch thou free from blame.
यथा पूर्वेभ्यः शतसा अम्र्ध्रः सहस्रसाः पर्यया वाजमिन्दो|	as to the men of old thou camest indu unharmed to strengthen winning hundreds thousands.
एवा पवस्व सुविताय नव्यसे तव वरतमन्वापः सचन्ते|	so now for new felicity flow onward the waters follow as thy law ordaineth.
हिन्वन्ति सूरमुस्रयः सवसारो जामयस पतिम|	the glittering maids send sūra forth the glorious sisters closeallied.
महामिन्दुं महीयुवः|	send indu forth their mighty lord.
पवमान रुचारुचा देवो देवेभ्यस परि|	pervade o pavamana all our treasures with repeated light.
विश्वा वसून्याविश|	god coming hither from the gods.
आ पवमान सुष्टुतिं वर्ष्टिं देवेभ्यो दुवः|	pour on us pavamana rain as service and rain praise for gods.
इषे पवस्व संयतम|	pour all to be our nourishment.
वर्षा हयसि भानुना दयुमन्तं तवा हवामहे|	thou art a steer by lustre we o pavamana faithfully.
पवमान सवाध्यः|	call upon thee the splendid one.
आ पवस्व सुवीर्यं मन्दमानः सवायुध|	do thou rejoicing noblyarmed pour upon us heroic strength.
इहो षविन्दवा गहि|	o indu come thou bitherward.
यदद्भिः परिषिच्यसे मर्ज्यमानो गभस्त्योः|	when thou art cleansed with both the hands and dipped in waters with the wood.
दरुणा सधस्थमश्नुषे|	thou comest to the gatheringplace.
पर सोमाय वयश्ववत पवमानाय गायत|	sing forth your songs as vyaśva sang to soma pavamana to.
महे सहस्रचक्षसे|	the mighty one with thousand eyes.
यस्य वर्णं मधुश्चुतं हरिं हिन्वन्त्यद्रिभिः|	whose coloured sap they drive with stones the yellow meathdistilling juice.
इन्दुमिन्द्राय पीतये|	indu for indra for his drink.
तस्य ते वाजिनो वयं विश्वा धनानि जिग्युषः|	we seek to gain the friendly love of thee that strong and mighty one.
सखित्वमा वर्णीमहे|	of thee the winner of all wealth.
वर्षा पवस्व धारया मरुत्वते च मत्सरः|	flow onward with thy stream a steer inspiriting the maruts lord.
विश्वा दधान ओजसा|	winning all riches by thy might.
तं तवा धर्तारमोण्योः पवमान सवर्द्र्शम|	i send thee forth to battle from the press o pavamana strong.
हिन्वे वाजेषु वाजिनम|	sustainer looker on the light.
अया चित्तो विपानया हरिः पवस्व धारया|	acknowledged by this song of mine flow tawnycoloured with thy stream.
युजं वाजेषु चोदय|	incite to battle thine ally.
आ न इन्दो महीमिषं पवस्व विश्वदर्शतः|	o indu visible to all pour out for us abundant food.
अस्मभ्यं सोम गातुवित|	soma be thou our prosperer.
आ कलशा अनूषतेन्दो धाराभिरोजसा|	the pitchers indu with thy streams have sung aloud in vigorous might.
एन्द्रस्य पीतयेविश|	enter them and let indra drink.
यस्य ते मद्यं रसं तीव्रं दुहन्त्यद्रिभिः|	o thou whose potent gladdening juice they milk out with the stones flow on.
स पवस्वाभिमातिहा|	destroyer of our enemies.
राजा मेधाभिरीयते पवमानो मनावधि|	king pavamana is implored with holy songs on mans behalf.
अन्तरिक्षेण यातवे|	to travel through the firmament.
आ न इन्दो शतग्विनं गवां पोषं सवश्व्यम|	bring us o indu hundredfold increase of kine and noble steeds.
वहा भगत्तिमूतये|	the gift of fortune for our help.
आ नः सोम सहो जुवो रूपं न वर्चसे भर|	pressed for the banquet of the gods o soma bring us might and speed.
सुष्वाणो देववीतये|	like beauty for a brilliant show.
अर्षा सोम दयुमत्तमोअभि दरोणानि रोरुवत|	soma flow on exceeding bright with loud roar to the wooden vats.
सीदञ्छ्येनोन योनिमा|	falconlike resting in thine home.
अप्सा इन्द्राय वायवे वरुणाय मरुद्भ्यः|	soma the waterwinner flows to indra vāyu varuṇa.
सोमो अर्षति विष्णवे|	to viṣṇu and the marut host.
इषं तोकाय नो दधदस्मभ्यं सोम विश्वतः|	soma  bestowing food upon our progeny from every sides.
आ पवस्वसहस्रिणम|	pour on us riches thousandfold.
ये सोमासः परावति ये अर्वावति सुन्विरे|	the soma juices which have been expressed afar or near at hand.
ये वादः शर्यणावति|	or there on Śaryaṇāvāns bank.
य आर्जीकेषु कर्त्वसु ये मध्ये पस्त्यानाम|	those pressed among arjikas pressed among the active in mens homes.
ये वा जनेषुपञ्चसु|	or pressed among the races five.
ते नो वर्ष्टिं दिवस परि पवन्तामा सुवीर्यम|	may these celestial drops expressed pour forth upon us as they flow.
सुवाना देवास इन्दवः|	rain from the heavens apd hero strength.
पवते हर्यतो हरिर्ग्र्णानो जमदग्निना|	urged forward oer the oxhide flows the lovely one of tawny hue.
हिन्वानो गोरधित्वचि|	lauded by jamadagnis song.
पर शुक्रासो वयोजुवो हिन्वानासो न सप्तयः|	like horses urged to speed the drops bright stirring vital power when blent.
शरीणानाप्सु मर्ञ्जत|	with milk are beautified in streams.
तं तवा सुतेष्वाभुवो हिन्विरे देवतातये|	so they who toil with juices send thee forward for the gods repast.
स पवस्वानया रुचा|	so with this splendour flow thou on.
आ ते दक्षं मयोभुवं वह्निमद्या वर्णीमहे|	we choose today that chariotsteed of thine the strong that brings us bliss.
पान्तमापुरुस्प्र्हम|	the guardian the desire of all.
आ मन्द्रमा वरेण्यमा विप्रमा मनीषिणम|	the excellent the gladdener the sage with heart that understands.
पान्तमा पुरुस्प्र्हम|	the guardian the desire of all.
आ रयिमा सुचेतुनमा सुक्रतो तनूष्वा|	who for ourselves o thou most wise is wealth and fair intelligence.
पान्तमा पुरुस्प्र्हम|	the guardian the desire of all.
सखाय आ नि शीदत पुनानाय पर गायत|	sit down o friends and sing aloud to him who purifies himself.
शिशुं न यज्ञैः परि भूषत शरिये|	deck him for glory like a child with holy rites.
समी वत्सं न मात्र्भिः सर्जता गयसाधनम|	unite him bringing household wealth even as a calf with mother kine.
देवाव्यम्मदमभि दविशवसम|	him who hath double strength the god delighting juice.
पुनाता दक्षसाधनं यथा शर्धाय वीतये|	purify him who gives us power that he most blessed one may be.
यथा मित्राय वरुणाय शन्तमः|	a banquet for the troop mitra and varuṇa.
अस्मभ्यं तवा वसुविदमभि वाणीरनूषत|	voices have sung aloud to thee as finderout of wealth for us.
गोभिष टे वर्णमभि वासयामसि|	we clothe the hue thou wearest with a robe of milk.
स नो मदानां पत इन्दो देवप्सरा असि|	thou indu art the food of gods o sovran of all gladdening drinks.
सखेव सख्ये गातुवित्तमो भव|	as friend for friend be thou best finder of success.
सनेमि कर्ध्यस्मदा रक्षसं कं चिदत्रिणम|	drive utterly away from us each demon each voracious fiend.
अपादेवं दवयुमंहो युयोधि नः|	the godless and the false keep sorrow far away.
परि परिया दिवः कविर वयांसि नप्त्य्र हितः|	the sage of heaven whose heart is wise when laid between both hands and pressed.
सुवानो याति कविक्रतुः|	sends us delightful powers of life.
परपर कषयाय पन्यसे जनाय जुष्टो अद्रुहे|	on onward to a glorious home dear to the people void of guile.
वीत्य अर्ष चनिष्ठया|	with excellent enjoyment flow.
स सूनुर मातरा शुचिर जातो जाते अरोचयत|	he the bright son when born illumed his parents who had sprung to life.
महान मही रताव्र्धा|	great son great strengtheners of law.
स सप्त धीतिभिर हितो नद्य अजिन्वद अद्रुहः|	urged by the seven devotions he hath stirred the guileless rivers which.
या एकम अक्षि वाव्र्धुः|	have magnified the single eye.
ता अभि सन्तम अस्त्र्तम महे युवानम आ दधुः|	these helped to might theyouthful one high over all invincible.
इन्दुम इन्द्र तव वरते|	even indu indra in thy law.
अभि वह्निर अमर्त्यः सप्त पश्यति वावहिः|	the immortal courser good to draw looks down upon the seven the fount.
करिविर देवीर अतर्पयत|	hath satisfied the goddesses.
अवा कल्पेषु नः पुमस तमांसि सोम योध्या|	aid us in holy rites o man o pavamana drive away.
तानि पुनान जघनः|	dark shades that must be met in fight.
नू नव्यसे नवीयसे सूक्ताय साधया पथः|	make the paths ready for a hymn newer and newer evermore.
परत्नवद रोचया रुचः|	make the lights shine as erst they shone.
पवमान महि शरवो गाम अश्वं रासि वीरवत|	give pavamana high renown give kine and steeds and hero sons.
सना मेधां सना सवः|	win for us wisdom win the light.
पर ते धारा असश्चतो दिवो न यन्ति वर्ष्टयः|	thy streams that never fail or waste flow forth like showers of rain from heaven.
अछा वाजं सहस्रिणम|	to bring a thousand stores of strength.
अभि परियाणि काव्या विश्वा चक्षाणो अर्षति|	he flows beholding on his way all wellbeloved sacred lore.
हरिस्तुञ्जान आयुधा|	greentinted brandishing his arms.
स मर्म्र्जान आयुभिरिभो राजेव सुव्रतः|	he when the people deck him like a docile king of elephants.
शयेनो न वंसु षीदति|	sits as a falcon in the wood.
स नो विश्वा दिवो वसूतो पर्थिव्या अधि|	so bring thou hitherward to us indu while thou art purified.
पुनान इन्दवाभर|	all treasures both of heaven and earth.
सोमा अस्र्ग्रमाशवो मधोर्मदस्य धारया|	swift soma drops have been effused in streams of meath the gladdening drink.
अभि विश्वानिकाव्या|	for sacred lore of every kind.
अनु परत्नास आयवः पदं नवीयो अक्रमुः|	hither to newer restingplace the ancient living ones are come.
रुचे जनन्त सूर्यम|	they made the sun that he might shine.
आ पवमान नो भरार्यो अदाशुषो गयम|	o pavamana bring to us the unsacrificing foemans wealth.
कर्धि परजावतीरिषः|	and give us food with progeny.
अभि सोमास आयवः पवन्ते मद्यं मदम|	the living somas being cleansed diffuse exhilarating drink.
अभि कोशं मधुश्चुतम|	turned to the vat which drips with meath.
सोमो अर्षति धर्णसिर्दधान इन्द्रियं रसम|	soma gows on intelligent possessing sap and mighty strength.
सुवीरो अभिशस्तिपाः|	brave hero who repels the curse.
इन्द्राय सोम पवसे देवेभ्यः सधमाद्यः|	for indra soma thou art cleansed a feastcompanion for the gods.
इन्दो वाजं सिषाससि|	ndu thou fain wilt win us strength.
अस्य पीत्वा मदानामिन्द्रो वर्त्राण्यप्रति|	when he had drunken draughts of this indra smote down resistless foes.
जघान जघनच्च नु|	yea smote them and shall smite them still.
पर हिन्वानो जनिता रोदस्यो रथो न वाजं सनिष्यन्नयासीत|	urged on the father of the earth and heaven hath gone forth like a car to gather booty.
इन्द्रं गछन्नायुधा संशिशानो विश्वा वसु हस्तयोरादधानः|	going to indra sharpening his weapons and in his hand containing every treasure.
अभि तरिप्र्ष्ठं वर्षणं वयोधामाङगूषाणामवावशन्त वाणीः|	to him the tones of sacred song have sounded steer of the triple height the lifebestower.
वना वसानो वरुणो न सिन्धून वि रत्नधा दयते वार्याणि|	dwelling in wood as varuṇa in rivers lavishing treasure he distributes blessings.
शूरग्रामः सर्ववीरः सहावाञ जेता पवस्व सनिता धनानि|	great conqueror warnorgirt lord of all heroes flow on thy way as he who winneth riches.
तिग्मायुधः कषिप्रधन्वा समत्स्वषाळ्हः साह्वान्प्र्तनासु शत्रून|	with sharpened arms with swift bow never vanquished in battle vanquishing in fight the foemen.
उरुगव्यूतिरभयानि कर्ण्वन समीचीने आ पवस्वा पुरन्धी|	giving security lord of wide dominion send us both earth and heaven with all their fulness.
अपः सिषासन्नुषसः सवर्गाः सं चिक्रदो महो अस्मभ्यं वाजान|	striving to win the dawns the light the waters and cattle call to us abundant vigour.
मत्सि सोम वरुणं मत्सि मित्रं मत्सीन्द्रमिन्दो पवमान विष्णुम|	o soma gladden varuṇa and mitra cheer indu pavamana indra viṣṇu.
मत्सि शर्धो मारुतं मत्सि देवान मत्सि महामिन्द्रमिन्दो मदाय|	cheer thou the gods the company of maruts indu cheer mighty indra to rejoicing.
एवा राजेव करतुमानमेन विश्वा घनिघ्नद दुरिता पवस्व|	thus like a wise and potent king flow onward destroying with thy vigour all misfortunes.
इन्दो सूक्ताय वचसे वयो धा यूयं पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	for our wellspoken hymn give life o indu do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
पवस्व मधुमत्तम इन्द्राय सोम करतुवित्तमो मदः|	for indra flow thou soma on as gladdening juice most sweet intelligent.
महि दयुक्षतमो मदः|	great cheering dwelling most in heaven.
यस्य ते पीत्वा वर्षभो वर्षायतेअस्य पीता सवर्विदः|	thou of whom having drunk the steer acts like a steer drinking of this that finds the light.
स सुप्रकेतो अभ्यक्रमीदिशोअछा वाजं नैतशः|	he excellently wise is come to strengthening food to spoil and wealth like etaśa.
तवं हयन्ग दैव्या पवमान जनिमानि दयुमत्तमः|	for verily pavamana thou hast splendidest called all the generations of.
अम्र्तत्वाय घोषयः|	the gods to immortality.
येना नवग्वो दध्यन्नपोर्णुते येन विप्रास आपिरे|	by whom dadhyac navagva opens fastened doors by whom the sages gained their wish.
देवानां सुम्ने अम्र्तस्य चारुणो येन शरवांस्यानशुः|	by whom they won the fame of lovely amṛta in the felicity of gods.
एष सय धारया सुतोअव्यो वारेभिः पवते मदिन्तमः|	effused he floweth in a stream best rapturegiver in the long wool of the sheep.
करीळन्नूर्मिरपामिव|	sporting as twere the waters wave.
य उस्रिया अप्या अन्तरश्मनो निर्गा अक्र्न्तदोजसा|	he who from out the rocky cavern took with might the redmrefulgent watery cows.
अभिव्रजं तत्निषे गव्यमश्व्यं वर्मीव धर्ष्णवा रुज|	thou masterest the stable full of kine and steeds burst it brave lord like one in mail.
आ सोता परि षिञ्चताश्वं न सतोममप्तुरं रजस्तुरम|	press ye and pour him like a steed laudworthy speeding through the region and the flood.
वनर्क्षमुदप्रुतम|	who swims in water roan in wood.
सहस्रधारं वर्षभं पयोव्र्धं परियं देवाय जन्मने|	increaser of the water steer with thousand streams dear to the race of deities.
रतेन य रतजातो विवाव्र्धे राजा देव रतं बर्हत|	who born in law hath waxen mighty by the law king god and lofty ordinance.
अभि दयुम्नं बर्हद यश इषस पते दिदीहि देव देवयुः|	make splendid glory shine on us thou lord of strengthening food god as the friend of gods.
विकोशं मध्यमं युव|	unclose the fount of middle air.
आ वच्यस्व सुदक्ष चम्वोः सुतो विशां वह्निर्न विश्पतिः|	roll onward to the bowls o mighty one effused as prince supporter of the tribes.
वर्ष्टिं दिवः पवस्व रीतिमपां जिन्वा गविष्टये धियः|	pour on us rain from heaven send us the waters flow incite our thoughts to win the spoil.
एतमु तयं मदच्युतं सहस्रधारं वर्षभं दिवो दुहुः|	they have drained him the steer of heaven him with a thousand streams distilling rapturous joy.
विश्वा वसूनि बिभ्रतम|	him who brings all things excellent.
वर्षा वि जज्ञे जनयन्नमर्त्यः परतपञ जयोतिषा तमः|	the mighty one was born immortal giving life lightening darkness with his shine.
स सुष्टुतः कविभिर्निर्णिजं दधे तरिधात्वस्य दंससा|	wcllpraised by sages he hath by his wondrous power assumed the threefold as his robe.
स सुन्वे यो वसूनां यो रायामानेता य इळानाम|	effused is he who brings good things who brings us bounteous gifts and sweet refreshing food.
सोमोयः सुक्षितीनाम|	soma who brings us quiet homes.
यस्य न इन्द्रः पिबाद यस्य मरुतो यस्य वार्यमणा भगः|	he whom our indra and the marut host shall drink bhaga shall drink with aryarnan.
आ येन मित्रावरुणा करामह एन्द्रमवसे महे|	by whom we bring to us mitra and varuṇa and indra for our great defence.
इन्द्राय सोम पातवे नर्भिर्यतः सवायुधो मदिन्तमः|	soma for indras drink do thou led by the men wellwcaponcd and most gladdening.
पवस्व मधुमत्तमः|	flow on with greatest store of sweets.
इन्द्रस्य हार्दि सोमधानमा विश समुद्रमिव सिन्धवः|	enter the somaholder even indras heart as rivers pass into the sea.
जुष्टो मित्राय वरुणाय वायवे दिवो विष्टम्भ उत्तमः|	acceptable to mitra vāyu varuṇa the noblest pillar of the heavens.
पर गायत्रेण गायत पवमानं विचर्षणिम|	sing forth and laud with sacred song most active pavamana laud.
इन्दुं सहस्रचक्षसम|	indu who sees with thousand eyes.
तं तवा सहस्रचक्षसमथो सहस्रभर्णसम|	thee who hast thousand eyes to see bearer of thousand burthens they.
अति वारमपाविषुः|	have filtered through the fleecy cloth.
अति वारान पवमानो असिष्यदत कलशानभि धावति|	he pavamana hath streamed through the fleece then he runs into the jars.
इन्द्रस्य हार्द्याविशन|	finding his way to indras heart.
इन्द्रस्य सोम राधसे शं पवस्व विचर्षणे|	that indra may be bounteous flow most active soma for our weal.
परजावद रेता भर|	bring genial seed with progeny.
तरिरस्मै सप्त धेनवो दुदुह्रे सत्यामाशिरं पूर्व्ये वयोमनि|	the three times seven milchkine in the eastern heaven have for this soma poured the genuine milky draught.
चत्वार्यन्या भुवनानि निर्णिजे चारूणि चक्रे यद रतैरवर्धत|	four other beauteous creatures hath he made for his adornment when he waxed in strength through holy rites.
स भिक्षमाणो अम्र्तस्य चारुण उभे दयावा काव्येना वि शश्रथे|	longing for lovely amṛta by his wisdom he divided each apart from other earth and heaven.
तेजिष्ठा अपो मंहना परि वयत यदी देवस्य शरवसा सदो विदुः|	he gladly wrapped himself in the most lucid floods when through their glory they found the gods restingplace.
ते अस्य सन्तु केतवोअम्र्त्यवोअदाभ्यासो जनुषी उभे अनु|	may those his brilliant rays he ever free from death inviolate for both classes of created things.
येभिर्न्र्म्णा च देव्या च पुनत आदिद राजानं मनना अग्र्भ्णत|	rays wherewith powers of men and gods are purified yea even for this have sageswelcomed him as king.
स मर्ज्यमानो दशभिः सुकर्मभिः पर मध्यमासु मात्र्षुप्रमे सचा|	he while he is adorned by the ten skilful ones that he too in the midmost mothers may create.
वरतानि पानो अम्र्तस्व चारुण उभे नर्चक्षानु पश्यते विशौ|	while he is watching oer the lovely amṛtas ways looks on both races as beholder of mankind.
स मर्म्र्जान इन्द्रियाय धायस ओभे अन्ता रोदसी हर्षते हितः|	he while he is adorned to stream forth mighty strength rejoices in his place between the earth and heaven.
वर्षा शुष्मेण बाधते वि दुर्मतीरादेदिशानः शर्यहेव शुरुधः|	the steer dispels the evilhearted with his might aiming at offerings as an archer at the game.
स मातरा न दद्र्शान उस्रियो नानददेति मरुतामिव सवनः|	beholding as it were two mother cows the steer goes roaring on his way even as the maruts roar.
जानन्न्र्तं परथमं यत सवर्णरं परशस्तये कमव्र्णीत सुक्रतुः|	knowing eternal law the earliest light of heaven he passing wise was chosen out to tell it forth.
रुवति भीमो वर्षभस्तविष्यया शर्ङगे शिशानो हरिणीविचक्षणः|	the fearful bull is bellowing with violent might farsighted sharpening his yellowcoloured horns.
आ योनिं सोमः सुक्र्तं नि षीदति गव्ययीत्वग भवति निर्णिगव्ययी|	soma assumes his seat in the wellfashioned place the cowhide and the sheepskin are his ornament.
शुचिः पुनानस्तन्वमरेपसमव्ये हरिर्न्यधाविष्ट सानवि|	bright making pure his body free from spot and stain on the sheeps back the goldencoloured hath flowed down.
जुष्टो मित्राय वरुणाय वायवे तरिधातु मधु करियते सुकर्मभिः|	acceptable to mitra vāyu varuṇa he is prepared as threefold meal by skilful men.
पवस्व सोम देववीतये वर्षेन्द्रस्य हार्दि सोमधानमा विश|	flow on for the gods banquet soma as a steer and enter indras heart the somas reservoir.
पुरा नो बाधाद दुरिताति पारय कषेत्रविद धि दिश आहा विप्र्छते|	bear us beyond misfortune ere we be oppres sed the man who knows the land directs the man who asks.
हितो न सप्तिरभि वाजमर्षेन्द्रस्येन्दो जठरमा पवस्व|	urged like a carsteed flow to strength o soma indu flow onward to the throat of indra.
नावा न सिन्धुमति पर्षि विद्वाञ्छूरो न युध्यन्नव नो निद सपः|	skilled bear us past as in a boat oer water as battling hero save us from the foeman.
इन्द्रमछ सुता इमे वर्षणं यन्तु हरयः|	to indra to the mighty steer may these goldcoloured juices go.
शरुष्टी जातास इन्दवः सवर्विदः|	drops rapidly produced that find the light of heaven.
अयं भराय सानसिरिन्द्राय पवते सुतः|	effused this juice victorious flows for indra for his maintenance.
सोमो जैत्रस्यचेतति यथा विदे|	soma bethinks him of the conqueror as he knows.
अस्येदिन्द्रो मदेष्वा गराभं गर्भ्णीत सानसिम|	may indra in his raptures gain from him the grasp that gathers spoil.
वज्रंच वर्षणं भरत समप्सुजित|	and winning waters wield the steerstrong thunderbolt.
पर धन्वा सोम जाग्र्विरिन्द्रायेन्दो परि सरव|	flow vigilant for indra thou soma yea indu run thou on.
दयुमन्तं शुष्ममा भरा सवर्विदम|	bring hither splendid strength that finds the light of heaven.
इन्द्राय वर्षणं मदं पवस्व विश्वदर्शतः|	do thou allbeautiful purify for indras sake the mighty juice.
सहस्रयामा पथिक्र्द विचक्षणः|	pathmaker thou far seeing with a thousand ways.
अस्मभ्यं गातुवित्तमो देवेभ्यो मधुमत्तमः|	best finder of prosperity for us most rich in sweets for gods.
सहस्रं याहिपथिभिः कनिक्रदत|	proceed thou loudly roaring on a thousand paths.
पवस्व देववीतय इन्दो धाराभिरोजसा|	o indu with thy streams in might flow for the banquet of the gods.
आ कलशं मधुमान सोम नः सदः|	rich in meath soma in our beaker take thy place.
तव दरप्सा उदप्रुत इन्द्रं मदाय वाव्र्धुः|	thy drops that swim in water have exalted indra to delight.
तवां देवासो अम्र्ताय कं पपुः|	the gods have drunk thee up for immortality.
आ नः सुतास इन्दवः पुनाना धावता रयिम|	stream opulence to us ye drops of soma pressed and purified.
वर्ष्टिद्यावोरीत्यापः सवर्विदः|	pouring down rain from heaven in hoods and finding light.
सोमः पुनान ऊर्मिणाव्यो वारं वि धावति|	soma while filtered with his wave flows through the long wool of the sheep.
अग्रे वाचःपवमानः कनिक्रदत|	shouting while purified before the voice of song.
धीभिर्हिन्वन्ति वाजिनं वने करीळन्तमत्यविम|	with songs they send the mighty forth sporting in wood above the fleece.
अभि तरिप्र्ष्ठं मतयः समस्वरन|	our psalms have glorified him of the triple height.
असर्जि कलशानभि मीळ्हे सप्तिर्न वाजयुः|	into the jars hath he been loosed like an impetuous steed for war.
पुनानो वाचं जनयन्नसिष्यदत|	and lifting up his voice while filtered glided on.
पवते हर्यतो हरिरति हवरांसि रंह्या|	goldhued and lovely in his course througb tangles of the wool he flows.
अभ्यर्षन सतोत्र्भ्यो वीरवद यशः|	and pours heroic fame upon the worshippers.
अया पवस्व देवयुर्मधोर्धारा अस्र्क्षत|	flow thus a faithful votary the streams of meath have been effused.
रेभन पवित्रम्पर्येषि विश्वतः|	thou comest to the filter singing from each side.
कराणा शिशुर्महीनां हिन्वन्न्र्तस्य दीधितिम|	the child when blended with the streams speeding the plan of sacrifice.
विश्वापरि परिया भुवदध दविता|	surpasses all things that are dear yea from of old.
उप तरितस्य पाष्योरभक्त यद गुहा पदम|	the place near the two pressingstones of trita hath he occupied.
यज्ञस्य सप्त धामभिरध परियम|	secret and dear through seven lights of sacrifice.
तरीणि तरितस्य धारया पर्ष्ठेष्वेरया रयिम|	urge to three courses on the heights of trita riches in a stream.
मिमीते अस्य योजना वि सुक्रतुः|	he who is passing wise measures his courses out.
जज्ञानं सप्त मातरो वेधामशासत शरिये|	even at his birth the mothers seven taught him for glory like a sage.
अयं धरुवो रयीणां चिकेत यत|	so that he firm and sure hath set his mind on wealth.
अस्य वरते सजोषसो विश्वे देवासो अद्रुहः|	under his sway of one accord are all the guileless deities.
सपार्हा भवन्ति रन्तयो जुषन्त यत|	warriors to be envied they when they are pleased.
यमी गर्भं रताव्र्धो दर्शे चारुमजीजनन|	the babe whom they who strengthen law have generated fair to see.
कविं मंहिष्ठमध्वरे पुरुस्प्र्हम|	much longed for at the sacrifice most liberal sage.
समीचीने अभि तमना यह्वी रतस्य मातरा|	to him united of themselves come the young parents of the rite.
तन्वाना यज्ञमानुषग यदञ्जते|	when they adorn him duly weaving sacrifice.
करत्वा शुक्रेभिरक्षभिरणोरप वरजं दिवः|	with wisdom and with radiant eyes unbar to us the stall of heaven.
हिन्वन्न्र्तस्य दीधितिं पराध्वरे|	speeding at solemn rite the plan of holy law.
पर तु दरव परि कोशं नि षीद नर्भिः पुनानो अभि वाजमर्ष|	run onward to the reservoir and seat thee cleansed by the men speed forward to the battle.
अश्वं न तवा वाजिनं मर्जयन्तोअछा बर्ही रशनाभिर्नयन्ति|	making thee beauteous like an able courser forth to the sacred grass with reins they lead thee.
सवायुधः पवते देव इन्दुरशस्तिहा वर्जनं रक्षमाणः|	indu the wellarmed god is flowing onward who quells the curse and guards from treacherous onslaught.
पिता देवानां जनिता सुदक्षो विष्टम्भो दिवो धरुणः पर्थिव्याः|	father begetter of the gods most skilful the buttress of the heavens and earths supporter.
रषिर्विप्रः पुरेता जनानां रभुर्धीर उशना काव्येन|	Ṛṣi and sage the champion of the people cleft and sagacious uśanā in wisdom.
स चिद विवेद निहितं यदासामपीच्यं गुह्यं नाम गोनाम|	he hath discovered even their hidden nature the cows concealed and most mysterious title.
एष सय ते मधुमानिन्द्र सोमो वर्षा वर्ष्णे परि पवित्रे अक्षाः|	this thine own soma rich in meath o indra steer for the steer hath flowed into the filter.
सहस्रसाः शतसा भूरिदावा शश्वत्तमं बर्हिरा वाज्यस्थात|	the strong freegiver winning hundreds thousands hath reached the holy grass that never fails him.
एते सोमा अभि गव्या सहस्रा महे वाजायाम्र्ताय शरवांसि|	these somas are for wealth of countless cattle renown therefor and mighty strength immortal.
पवित्रेभिः पवमाना अस्र्ग्रञ्छ्रवस्यवो न पर्तनाजो अत्याः|	these have been sent forth urified by strainers like steeds who rusg to battle fain for glory.
परि हि षमा पुरुहूतो जनानां विश्वासरद भोजना पूयमानः|	he while he cleanses him invoked of many hath flowed to give the people all enjoyment.
अथा भर शयेनभ्र्त परयांसि रयिं तुञ्जानो अभि वाजमर्ष|	thou whom the falcon brought bring dainty viands bestir thyself and send us wealth and booty.
एष सुवानः परि सोमः पवित्रे सर्गो न सर्ष्टो अदधावदर्वा|	this soma pressed into the cleansing filter hath run as twere a host let loose the courser.
तिग्मे शिशानो महिषो न शर्ङगे गा गव्यन्नभिशूरो न सत्वा|	like a strong bull who whets his horns kpenpointed like a brave warrior in the fray for cattle.
एषा ययौ परमादन्तरद्रेः कूचित सतीरूर्वे गा विवेद|	he issued forth from out the loftiest mountain and found kine hidden somewhere in a stable.
दिवो न विद्युत सतनयन्त्यभ्रैः सोमस्य ते पवत इन्द्रधारा|	somas stream clears itself for thee o indra like lightning thundering through the clouds of heaven.
उत सम राशिं परि यासि गोनामिन्द्रेण सोम सरथं पुनानः|	cleansing thyselr and borne along with indra soma thou goest round the herd of cattle.
पूर्वीरिषो बर्हतीर्जीरदानो शिक्षा शचीवस्तव ता उपष्टुत|	may thy praise help us mighty one prompt giver to the full ample food which thou bestowest.
अभी नवन्ते अद्रुहः परियमिन्द्रस्य काम्यम|	the guileless ones are singing praise to indras well beloved friend.
वत्सं न पूर्व आयुनि जातं रिहन्ति मातरः|	as in the morning of its life the mothers lick the newborn calf.
पुनान इन्दवा भर सोम दविबर्हसं रयिम|	o indu while they cleanse thee bring o soma doublywaxing wealth.
तवं वसूनिपुष्यसि विश्वानि दाशुषो गर्हे|	thou in the worshippers abode causest all treasures to increase.
तवं धियं मनोयुजं सर्जा वर्ष्टिं न तन्यतुः|	set free the song which mind hath yoked even as thunder frees the rain.
तवं वसूनि पार्थिवा दिव्या च सोम पुष्यसि|	all treasures of the earth and heaven o soma thou dost multiply.
परि ते जिग्युषो यथा धारा सुतस्य धावति|	thy stream when thou art pressed runs on like some victorious warriors steed.
रंहमाणाव्यव्ययं वारं वाजीव सानसिः|	hastening onward through the fleece like a fierce horse who wins the prize.
करत्वे दक्षाय नः कवे पवस्व सोम धारया|	flow on sage soma with thy stream to give us mental power and strength.
इन्द्राय पातवे सुतो मित्राय वरुणाय च|	effused for indra for his drink for mitra and for varuṇa.
पवस्व वाजसातमः पवित्रे धारया सुतः|	flow to the filter with thy stream effused best winner thou of spoil.
इन्द्राय सोमविष्णवे देवेभ्यो मधुमत्तमः|	o soma as most rich in sweets for indra viṣṇu and the gods.
तवां रिहन्ति मातरो हरिं पवित्रे अद्रुहः|	the mothers void of guiles caress thee goldencoloured in the sieve.
वत्सं जातंन धेनवः पवमान विधर्मणि|	as cows o pavamana lick the newborn calf as law commands.
पवमान महि शरवश्चित्रेभिर्यासि रश्मिभिः|	thou pavamana movest on with wondrous rays to great renown.
शर्धन तमांसि जिघ्नसे विश्वानि दाशुषो गर्हे|	striving within the votarys house thou drivest all the glooms away.
तवं दयां च महिव्रत पर्थिवीं चाति जभ्रिषे|	lord of great sway thou liftest thee above the heavens above the earth.
परति दरापिममुञ्चथाः पवमान महित्वना|	thou pavamana hast assumed thy coat of mail in majesty.
पर सोमासो मदच्युतः शरवसे नो मघोनः|	the raptureshedding somadrops effused in our assembly have.
सुता विदथे अक्रमुः|	flowed forth to glorify our prince.
आदीं तरितस्य योषणो हरिं हिन्वन्त्यद्रिभिः|	then tritas maidens onward urge the tawnycoloured with the stones.
इन्दुमिन्द्राय पीतये|	indu for indra for his drink.
आदीं हंसो यथा गणं विश्वस्यावीवशन मतिम|	now like a swan he maketh all the company sing each his hymn.
अत्योन गोभिरज्यते|	he like a steed is bathed in milk.
उभे सोमावचाकशन मर्गो न तक्तो अर्षसि|	o soma viewing heaven and earth thou runncst like a darting deer.
सीदन्न्र्तस्य योनिमा|	set in the place of sacrifice.
अभि गावो अनूषत योषा जारमिव परियम|	the cows have sung with joy to him even as a woman to her love.
अगन्नाजिं यथा हितम|	he came as to a settled race.
अस्मे धेहि दयुमद यशो मघवद्भ्यश्च मह्यं च|	bestow illustrious fame on us both on our liberal lords and me.
सनिं मेधामुत शरवः|	glory intelligence and wealth.
शिशुर्न जातोअव चक्रदद वने सवर्यद वाज्यरुषः सिषासति|	born like a youngling he hath clamoured in the wood when he the red the strong would win the light of heaven.
दिवो रेतसा सचते पयोव्र्धा तमीमहे सुमती शर्म सप्रथः|	he comes with heavenly seed that makes the water swell him for widespreading shelter we implore with prayer.
दिवो य सकम्भो धरुणः सवातत आपूर्णो अंशुः पर्येतिविश्वतः|	a farextended pillar that supports the sky the somastalk filled full moves itself every way.
सेमे मही रोदसी यक्षदाव्र्ता समीचीने दाधार समिषः कविः|	he shall bring both these great worlds while the rite proceeds the sage holds these who move together and all food.
महि पसरः सुक्र्तं सोम्यं मधूर्वी गव्यूतिरदितेरतं यते|	wide space hath he who follows aditis right path and mighty wellmade food meath blent with soma juice.
ईशे यो वर्ष्टेरित उस्रियो वर्षापां नेता य इतूतिरगमियः|	he who from hence commands the rain steer of the kine leader of floods who helps us hence who claims our laud.
आत्मन्वन नभो दुह्यते घर्तं पय रतस्य नाभिरम्र्तं विजायते|	butter and milk are drawn from animated cloud thence amṛta is produced centre of sacrifice.
समीचीनाः सुदानवः परीणन्ति तं नरो हितमव मेहन्ति पेरवः|	hini the most bounteous ones ever united love him as ouir friend the men who make all swell rain down.
अरावीदंशुः सचमान ऊर्मिणा देवाव्यं मनुषे पिन्वतित्वचम|	the somastalk hath roared following with the wave he swells with sap for man the skin which gods enjoy.
दधाति गर्भमदितेरुपस्थ आ येन तोकं च तनयं च धामहे|	upon the lap of aditi he lays the germ by means whereof we gain children and progeny.
सहस्रधारेअव ता असश्चतस्त्र्तीये सन्तु रजसि परजावतीः|	in the third region which distils a thousand streams may the exhaustless ones descend with procreant power.
चतस्रो नाभो निहिता अवो दिवो हविर्भरन्त्यम्र्तं घर्तश्चुतः|	the kindred four have been sent downward from the heavens dropping with oil they bring amṛta and sacred gifts.
शवेतं रूपं कर्णुते यत सिषासति सोमो मीढ्वानसुरो वेद भूमनः|	soma assumes white colour when he strives to gain the bounteous asura knows full many a precious boon.
धिया शमी सचते सेमभि परवद दिवस कवन्धमव दर्षदुद्रिणम|	down the steep slope through song he comes to sacrifice and he will burst the waterholding cask of heaven.
अध शवेतं कलशं गोभिरक्तं कार्ष्मन्ना वाज्यक्रमीत ससवान|	yea to the shining milkanointed beaker as to his goal hath stepped the conquering courser.
आ हिन्विरे मनसा देवयन्तः कक्षीवते शतहिमाय गोनाम|	pioussouled men have sent their giffi of cattle unto kakṣīvān of the hundred winters.
अद्भिः सोम पप्र्चानस्य ते रसोअव्यो वारं वि पवमान धावति|	soma thy juice when thou art blended with the streams flows pavamana through the long wool of the sheep.
स मर्ज्यमानः कविभिर्मदिन्तम सवदस्वेन्द्राय पवमान पीतये|	so cleansed by sages o best giver of delight grow sweet for indra pavamana for his drink.
इन्द्राय सोम सुषुतः परि सरवापामीवा भवतु रक्षसा सह|	flow on to indra soma carefully effused let sickness stay afar together with the fiends.
मा ते रसस्य मत्सत दवयाविनो दरविणस्वन्त इह सन्त्विन्दवः|	let not the doubletongued delight them with thy juice here be thy flowing drops laden with opulence.
अस्मान समर्ये पवमान चोदय दक्षो देवानामसि हि परियो मदः|	o pavamana urge us forward in the fight thou art the vigour of the gods the wellloved drink.
जहि शत्रून्रभ्या भन्दनायतः पिबेन्द्र सोममव नो मर्धो जहि|	smite thou our enemies who raise the shout of joy indra drink soma juice and drive away our foes.
अदब्ध इन्दो पवसे मदिन्तम आत्मेन्द्रस्य भवसि धासिरुत्तमः|	unharmed best cheerer thou o indu flowest on thou even thou thyself art indras noblest food.
अभि सवरन्ति बहवो मनीषिणो राजानमस्य भुवनस्यनिंसते|	full many a wise man lifts to thee the song of praise and hails thee with a kiss as sovran of this world.
सहस्रणीथः शतधारो अद्भुत इन्द्रायेन्दुः पवते काम्यं मधु|	wondrous with hundred streams hymned in a thousand songs indu pours out for indra his delightrul meath.
जयन कषेत्रमभ्यर्षा जयन्नप उरुं नो गातुं कर्णु सोम मीढ्वः|	winning us land and waters flow thou hitherward rainer of bounties soma make broad way for us.
कनिक्रदत कलशे गोभिरज्यसे वयव्ययं समया वारमर्षसि|	roaring within the beaker thou art balmed with milk thou passest through the fleecy filter all at once.
मर्म्र्ज्यमानो अत्यो न सानसिरिन्द्रस्य सोम जठरे समक्षरः|	carefully cleansed and decked like a prizewinning steed o soma thou hast flowed down within indras throat.
सवादुः पवस्व दिव्याय जन्मने सवादुरिन्द्राय सुहवीतुनाम्ने|	flow onward sweet of flavour for the heavenly race for indra sweet whose name is easily invoked.
सवादुर्मित्राय वरुणाय वायवे बर्हस्पतये मधुमानदाभ्यः|	flow sweet for mitra varuṇa and vāyu rich in meath inviolable for bṛhaspati.
अत्यं मर्जन्ति कलशे दश कषिपः पर विप्राणां मतयो वाच ईरते|	ten rapid fingers deck the courser in the jar with hymns the holy singers send their voices forth.
पवमाना अभ्यर्षन्ति सुष्टुतिमेन्द्रं विशन्तिमदिरास इन्दवः|	the filtering juices hasten to their eulogy the drops that gladden find their way to indras heart.
पवमानो अभ्यर्षा सुवीर्यमुर्वीं गव्यूतिं महि शर्म सप्रथः|	while thou art purified pour on us hero strength great farextended shelter spacious pasturage.
माकिर्नो अस्य परिषूतिरीशतेन्दो जयेम तवयाधनंधनम|	let no oppression master this our holy work may we o indu gain all opulence through thee.
अधि दयामस्थाद वर्षभो विचक्षणोअरूरुचद वि दिवो रोचना कविः|	the steer who sees afar hath risen above the sky the sage hath caused the lights of heaven to give their shine.
राजा पवित्रमत्येति रोरुवद दिवः पीयूषन्दुहते नर्चक्षसः|	the king is passing through the filter with a roar they drain the milk of heaven from him who looks on men.
दिवो नाके मधुजिह्वा असश्चतो वेना दुहन्त्युक्षणं गिरिष्ठाम|	high in the vault of heaven unceasing honeytongued the loving ones drain out the mountainhaunting steer.
अप्सु दरप्सं वाव्र्धानं समुद्र आ सिन्धोरूर्मामधुमन्तं पवित्र आ|	the drop that hath grown great in waters in the lake meathrich in the streams wave and in the cleansing sieve.
नाके सुपर्णमुपपप्तिवांसं गिरो वेनानामक्र्पन्त पूर्वीः|	the loving ones besought with many voices the eagle who had flown away to heaven.
शिशुं रिहन्ति मतयः पनिप्नतं हिरण्ययं शकुनं कषामणि सथाम|	hymns kiss the youngling worthy of laudation resting on earth the bird of golden colour.
ऊर्ध्वो गन्धर्वो अधि नाके अस्थाद विश्वा रूपा परतिचक्षाणो अस्य|	high to heavens vault hath the gandharva risen beholding all his varied forms and figures.
भानुः शुक्रेण शोचिषा वयद्यौत परारूरुचद रोदसी मातरा शुचिः|	his ray hath shone abroad with gleaming splendour pure he hath lighted both the worlds the parents.
पवस्व देवमादनो विचर्षणिरप्सा इन्द्राय वरुणाय वायवे|	flow cheering gods most active winner of the flood for indra and for vāyu and for varuṇa.
कर्धी नो अद्य वरिवः सवस्तिमदुरुक्षितौ गर्णीहि दैव्यं जनम|	bestow on us today wide room with happiness and in tbine ample dwelling laud the host of heaven.
आ यस्तस्थौ भुवनान्यमर्त्यो विश्वानि सोमः परि तान्यर्षति|	he who hath come anear to creatures that have life immortal soma flows onward to all of them.
कर्ण्वन संच्र्तं विच्र्तमभिष्टय इन्दुः सिषक्त्युषसं न सूर्यः|	effecting for our aid both union and release indu like sūrya follows closely after dawn.
आ यो गोभिः सर्ज्यत ओषधीष्वा देवानां सुम्न इषयन्नुपावसुः|	he who is poured with milk he who within the plants hastes bringing treasure for the happiness of gods.
आ विद्युता पवते धारया सुत इन्द्रं सोमो मादयन दैव्यं जनम|	he poured forth in a stream flows with the lightnings flash soma who gladdens indra and the host of heaven.
एष सय सोमः पवते सहस्रजिद धिन्वानो वाचमिषिरामुषर्बुधम|	winner of thousands he this soma flows along raising a vigorous voice that wakens with the dawn.
इन्दुः समुद्रमुदियर्ति वायुभिरेन्द्रस्य हार्दिकलशेषु सीदति|	indu with winds drives on the ocean of the air he sinks within the jars he rests in indras heart.
अभि तयं गावः पयसा पयोव्र्धं सोमं शरीणन्ति मतिभिः सवर्विदम|	the kine with milk dress him who makes the milk increase soma amid the songs who finds the light of heaven.
धनंजयः पवते कर्त्व्यो रसो विप्रः कविःकाव्येना सवर्चनाः|	winner of wealth the effectual juice is flowing on singer and sage by wisdom dear as heaven itself.
पर त आशवः पवमान धीजवो मदा अर्षन्ति रघुजा इव तमना|	thy gladdening draughts o pavamana urged by song flow swiftly of themselves like sons of fleetfoot mares.
दिव्याः सुपर्णा मधुमन्त इन्दवो मदिन्तमासः परि कोशमासते|	the drops of soma juice those eagles of the heavens most cheering rich in meath rest in the reservoir.
पर ते मदासो मदिरास आशवोअस्र्क्षत रथ्यासो यथा पर्थक|	as rapid chariotsteeds so turned in several ways have thine exhilarating juices darted forth.
धेनुर्न वत्सं पयसाभि वज्रिणमिन्द्रमिन्दवो मधुमन्त ऊर्मयः|	somadrops rich in meath waves to the thunderarmed to indra like milchkine who seek their calf with milk.
अत्यो न हियानो अभि वाजमर्ष सवर्वित कोशं दिवो अद्रिमातरम|	like a steed urged to battle finder of the light speed onward to the cloudborn reservoir of heaven.
वर्षा पवित्रे अधि सानो अव्यये सोमः पुनान इन्द्रियाय धायसे|	a steer that oer the woolly surface seeks the sieve soma while purified for indras nourishment.
पर त आश्विनीः पवमान धीजुवो दिव्या अस्र्ग्रन पयसा धरीमणि|	fleet as swift steeds thy drops divine thoughtswift have been o pavamana poured with milk into the vat.
परान्तरषयः सथाविरीरस्र्क्षत ये तवा मर्जन्त्य रषिषाण वेधसः|	the Ṛṣis have poured in continuous soma drops ordainers who adorn thee friend whom Ṛṣis love.
विश्वा धामानि विश्वचक्ष रभ्वसः परभोस्ते सतः परियन्ति केतवः|	o thou who seest all things sovran as thou art and passing strong thy rays encompass all abodes.
वयानशिः पवसे सोम धर्मभिः पतिर्विश्वस्य भुवनस्य राजसि|	pervading with thy natural powers thou flowest on and as the whole worlds lord o soma thou art king.
उभयतः पवमानस्य रश्मयो धरुवस्य सतः परि यन्ति केतवः|	the beams of pavamana sent from earth and heaven his ensigns who is ever steadfast travel round.
यदी पवित्रे अधि मर्ज्यते हरिः सत्ता नि योना कलशेषु सीदति|	when on the sieve the goldenhued is cleansed he rests within the vats as one who seats him in his place.
यज्ञस्य केतुः पवते सवध्वरः सोमो देवानामुप याति निष्क्र्तम|	served with fair rites he flows ensign of sacrifice soma advances to the special place of gods.
सहस्रधारः परि कोशमर्षति वर्षा पवित्रमत्येति रोरुवत|	he speeds with thousand currents to the reservoir and passes through the filter bellowing as a bull.
राजा समुद्रं नद्यो वि गाहतेअपामूर्मिं सचते सिन्धुषु शरितः|	the sovran dips him in the seain and the streams and set in rivers with the waters wave moves on.
अध्यस्थात सानु पवमानो अव्ययं नाभा पर्थिव्या धरुणो महो दिवः|	high heavens sustainer at the central point of earth raised on the fleecy surface pavamana stands.
दिवो न सानु सतनयन्नचिक्रदद दयौश्च यस्य पर्थिवी च धर्मभिः|	he on whose high decree the heavens and earth depend nath roared and thundered like the summit of the sky.
इन्द्रस्य सख्यं पवते विवेविदत सोमः पुनानःकलशेषु सीदति|	soma flows on obtaining indras friendly love and as they purify him settles in the jars.
जयोतिर्यज्ञस्य पवते मधु परियं पिता देवानां जनिता विभूवसुः|	he light of sacrifice distils delicious meath most wealthy father and begetter of the gods.
दधाति रत्नं सवधयोरपीच्यं मदिन्तमो मत्सर इन्द्रियो रसः|	he gladdening best of cheerers juicehat indra loves enriches with mysterious treasure earth and heaven.
अभिक्रन्दन कलशं वाज्यर्षति पतिर्दिवः शतधारो विचक्षणः|	the vigorous and farseeing one the lord of heaven flows shouting to the beaker with his thousand streams.
हरिर्मित्रस्य सदनेषु सीदति मर्म्र्जानोअविभिःसिन्धुभिर्व्र्षा|	coloured like gold he rests in seats where mitra dwells the steer made beautiful by rivers and by sheep.
अग्रे सिन्धूनां पवमानो अर्षत्यग्रे वाचो अग्रियो गोषु गछति|	in forefront of the rivers pavamana speeds in forefront of the hymn foremost among the kine.
अग्रे वाजस्य भजते महाधनं सवायुधः सोत्र्भिः पूयते वर्षा|	he shares the mighty booty in the van of war the wellarmed steer is purified by worshippers.
अयं मतवाञ्छकुनो यथा हितोअव्ये ससार पवमान ऊर्मिणा|	this heedful pavamana like a bird sent forth hath with his wave flowed onward to the fleecy sieve.
तव करत्वा रोदसी अन्तरा कवे शुचिर्धिया पवते सोम इन्द्र ते|	o indra through thy wisdom b thy thought o sage soma flows bright and pure between the earth and heaven.
दरापिं वसानो यजतो दिविस्प्र्शमन्तरिक्षप्रा भुवनेष्वर्पितः|	he clad in mail that reaches heaven the holy one filling the firmament stationed amid the worlds.
सवर्जज्ञानो नभसाभ्यक्रमीत परत्नमस्य पितरमा विवासति|	knowing the realm of light hath come to us in rain he summons to himself his own primeval sire.
सो अस्य विशे महि शर्म यछति यो अस्य धाम परथमं वयानशे|	he who was first of all to penetrate his form bestowed upon his race wide shelter and defence.
पदं यदस्य परमे वयोमन्यतो विश्वा अभि संयाति संयतः|	from that high station which he hath in loftiest heaven he comes victorious to all encounters here.
परो अयासीदिन्दुरिन्द्रस्य निष्क्र्तं सखा सख्युर्न पर मिनाति संगिरम|	indu hath started for indras special place and slights not as a friend the promise of his friend.
मर्य इव युवतिभिः समर्षति सोमः कलशे शतयाम्ना पथा|	soma speeds onward like a youth to youtlitial maids and gains the beaker by a course of bundred paths.
पर वो धियो मन्द्रयुवो विपन्युवः पनस्युवः संवसनेष्वक्रमुः|	your songs exhilarating tuneful uttering praise are come into the placns where the people meet.
सोमं मनीषा अभ्यनूषत सतुभोअभि धेनवः पयसेमशिश्रयुः|	worshippers have exalted soma with their hymns and milch kine have come near to meet him with their milk.
आ नः सोम संयतं पिप्युशीमिषमिन्दो पवस्व पवमानोस्रिधम|	o soma indu while they cleanse thee pour on us accumulateds plentiful nutritious food.
या नो दोहते तरिरहन्नसश्चुषी कषुमद वाजवन मधुमद सुवीर्यम|	which ceaseless thrice a day shall yield us hero power enriched with store of nourishment and strength and meath.
वर्षा मतीनां पवते विचक्षणः सोमो अह्नः परतरीतोषसो दिवः|	farseeing soma flows the steer the lord of hymns the furtherer of day of morning and of heaven.
कराणा सिन्धूनां कलशानवीवशदिन्द्रस्य हार्द्याविशन मनीषिभिः|	mixt with the streams he caused the beakers to resound and with the singers aid they entered indras heart.
मनीषिभिः पवते पूर्व्यः कविर्न्र्भिर्यतः परि कोशानचिक्रदत|	on with the prudent singers flows the ancient sage and guided by the men hath roared about the vats.
तरितस्य नाम जनयन मधु कषरदिन्द्रस्य वायोः सख्याय कर्तवे|	producing tritas name may he pour forth the meath that vāyu and that indra may become his friends.
अयं पुनान उषसो वि रोचयदयं सिन्धुभ्यो अभवदु लोकक्र्त|	he being purified hath made the mornings shine this even this is he who gave the rivers room.
अयं तरिः सप्त दुदुहान आशिरं सोमो हर्दे पवते चारु मत्सरः|	he made the three times seven pour out the milky flow soma the cheerer yields whateer the heart finds sweet.
पवस्व सोम दिव्येषु धामसु सर्जान इन्दो कलशे पवित्र आ|	flow onward soma in thine own celestial forms flow indu poured within the beaker and the sieve.
सीदन्निन्द्रस्य जठरे कनिक्रदन नर्भिर्यतः सूर्यमारोहयो दिवि|	sinking into the throat of indra with a roar led by the men thou madest sūrya mount to heaven.
अद्रिभिः सुतः पवसे पवित्र आ इन्दविन्द्रस्य जठरेष्वाविशन|	pressed out with stones thou flowest onward to the sieve o indu entering the depths of indras throat.
तवं नर्चक्षा अभवो विचक्षण सोम गोत्रमङगिरोभ्योअव्र्णोरप|	farsighted soma now thou lookest on mankind thou didst unbar the cowstall for the aṅgirases.
तवां सोम पवमानं सवाध्योअनु विप्रासो अमदन्नवस्यवः|	in thee o soma while thou purifitedst thee highthoughted sages seeking favour have rejoiced.
तवां सुपर्ण आभरद दिवस परीन्दो विश्वाभिर्मतिभिः परिष्क्र्तम|	down from the heavens the falcon brought thee hitherward even thee o indu thee whom all our hymns adorn.
अव्ये पुनानं परि वार ऊर्मिणा हरिं नवन्ते अभि सप्त धेनवः|	seven milchkine glorify the tawnycoloured one while with his wave in wool he purifies himself.
अपामुपस्थे अध्यायवः कविं रतस्य योना महिषा अहेषत|	the living men the mighty have impelled the sage into the waters lap the place of sacrifice.
इन्दुः पुनानो अति गाहते मर्धो विश्वानि कर्ण्वन सुपथानि यज्यवे|	indu attaining purity plunges through the foe making ilis ways all easy for the pious man.
गाः कर्ण्वानो निर्णिजं हर्यतः कविरत्यो न करीळन परि वारमर्षति|	making the kine his mantle he the lovely sage runs like a sporting courser onward through the fleece.
असश्चतः शतधारा अभिश्रियो हरिं नवन्तेअव ता उदन्युवः|	the ceaseless watery fountains with their hundred streams sing as they hasten near to him the goldenhued.
कषिपो मर्जन्ति परि गोभिराव्र्तं तर्तीये पर्ष्ठे अधि रोचने दिवः|	him clad in robes of milk swift fingers beautify on the third height and in the luminous realm of heaven.
तवेमाः परजा दिव्यस्य रेतसस्त्वं विश्वस्य भुवनस्य राजसि|	these are thy generations of celestial seed thou art the sovran lord of all the world of life.
अथेदं विश्वं पवमान ते वशे तवमिन्दो परथमोधामधा असि|	this universe o pavamana owns thy sway thou indu art the first establisher of law.
तवं समुद्रो असि विश्ववित कवे तवेमाः पञ्च परदिशो विधर्मणि|	thou art the sea o sage who bringest alf to light under thy law are these five regions of the world.
तवं दयां च पर्थिवीं चाति जभ्रिषे तव जयोतींषि पवमान सूर्यः|	tlou reachest out beyond the earth beyond the heavens thine are the lights o pavamana thine the sun.
तवं पवित्रे रजसो विधर्मणि देवेभ्यः सोम पवमान पूयसे|	thou in the filter soma pavamana art purified to support the region for the gods.
तवामुशिजः परथमा अग्र्भ्णत तुभ्येमा विश्वा भुवनानि येमिरे|	the chief the longing ones have sought to hold thee fast and all these living creatures have been turned to thee.
पर रेभ एत्यति वारमव्ययं वर्षा वनेष्वव चक्रदद्धरिः|	onward the singer travels oer the fleecy sieve the tawny steer hath bellowed in the wooden vats.
सं धीतयो वावशाना अनूषत शिशुं रिहन्ति मतयः पनिप्नतम|	hymns have been sung aloud in resonant harmony and holy songs kiss him the child who claims our praise.
स सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिः परि वयत तन्तुं तन्वानस्त्रिव्र्तंयथा विदे|	he hath assumed the rays of sūrya for his robe spinning as he knows bow the triplytwisted thread.
नयन्न्र्तस्य परशिषो नवीयसीः पतिर्जनीनामुप याति निष्क्र्तम|	he guiding to the newest rules of holy law comes as the womens consort to the special place.
राजा सिन्धूनां पवते पतिर्दिव रतस्य याति पथिभिः कनिक्रदत|	on flows the king of rivers and the lord of heaven he follows with a shout the paths of holy law.
सहस्रधारः परि षिच्यते हरिः पुनानो वाचं जनयन्नुपावसुः|	the goldenhued is poured forth with his hundred streams wealthbringer lifting up his voice while purified.
पवमान मह्यर्णो वि धावसि सूरो न चित्रो अव्ययानि पव्यया|	fain to be cleansed thou pavamana pourest out like wondrous sūrya through the fleece an ample sea.
गभस्तिपूतो नर्भिरद्रिभिः सुतो महे वाजाय धन्याय धन्वसि|	purified with the hands pressed by the men with stones thou speedest on to mighty bootybringing war.
इषमूर्जं पवमानाभ्यर्षसि शयेनो न वंसु कलशेषुसीदसि|	thou pavamana sendest food and power in streams thou sittest in the beakers as a hawk on trees.
इन्द्राय मद्वा मद्यो मदः सुतो दिवो विष्टम्भ उपमो विचक्षणः|	for indra poured as cheering juice to make him glad as nearest and farseeing bearerup of heaven.
सप्त सवसारो अभि मातरः शिशुं नवं जज्ञानं जेन्यं विपश्चितम|	the sisters seven the mothers stand around the babe the noble newborn infant skilled in holy song.
अपां गन्धर्वं दिव्यं नर्चक्षसं सोमंविश्वस्य भुवनस्य राजसे|	gandharva of the floods divine beholding men soma that he may reign as king of all the world.
ईशान इमा भुवनानि वीयसे युजान इन्दो हरितः सुपर्ण्यः|	as sovran lord thereof thou passest through these worlds o indu harnessing thy tawny wellwinged mares.
तास्ते कषरन्तु मधुमद घर्तं पयस्तव वरते सोम तिष्ठन्तु कर्ष्टयः|	may they pour forth for thee milk and oil rich in sweets o soma let the folk abide in thy decree.
तवं नर्चक्षा असि सोम विश्वतः पवमान वर्षभ ता वि धावसि|	o soma thou beholdest men from every side o pavamana steer thou wanderest through these.
स नः पवस्व वसुमद धिरण्यवद वयं सयाम भुवनेषु जीवसे|	pour out upon us wealth in treasure and in gold may we have strength to live among the things that be.
गोवित पवस्व वसुविद धिरण्यविद रेतोधा इन्दो भुवनेष्वर्पितः|	winner of gold and goods and cattle flow thou on set as impregner indu mid the worlds of life.
तवं सुवीरो असि सोम विश्ववित तं तवा विप्रा उप गिरेम आसते|	rich in brave men art thou soma who winnest all these holy singers wait upon thee with the song.
उन मध्व ऊर्मिर्वनना अतिष्ठिपदपो वसानो महिषो वि गाहते|	the wave of flowing meath hath wakened up desires the steer enrobed in milk plunges into the streams.
राजा पवित्ररथो वाजमारुहत सहस्रभ्र्ष्टिर्जयति शरवो बर्हत|	borne on his chariotsieve the king hath risen to war and with a thousand rays hath won him high renown.
स भन्दना उदियर्ति परजावतीर्विश्वायुर्विश्वाः सुभरा अहर्दिवि|	dear to all life he sends triumphant praises forth abundant bringing offspring each succeeding day.
बरह्म परजावद रयिमश्वपस्त्यं पीत इन्दविन्द्रमस्मभ्यं याचतात|	from indra crave for us indu when thou art quaffed the blessing that gives children wealth that harbours steeds.
सो अग्रे अह्नां हरिर्हर्यतो मदः पर चेतसा चेतयते अनुद्युभिः|	when days begin the strong juice lovely goldenhued is recognized by wisdom more and more each day.
दवा जना यातयन्नन्तरीयते नरा च शंसं दैव्यं च धर्तरि|	he stirring both the races goes between the two the bearer of the word of men and word of gods.
अञ्जते वयञ्जते समञ्जते करतुं रिहन्ति मधुनाभ्यञ्जते|	they balm him balm him over balm him thoroughly caress the mighty strength and balm it with the meath.
सिन्धोरुच्छ्वासे पतयन्तमुक्षणं हिरण्यपावाः पशुमासु गर्भ्णते|	they seize the flying steer at the streams breathingplace cleansing with gold they grasp the animal herein.
विपश्चिते पवमानाय गायत मही न धारात्यन्धो अर्षति|	sing forth to pavamana skilled in holy song the juice is flowing onward like a mighty stream.
अहिर्न जूर्णामति सर्पति तवचमत्यो न करीळन्नसरद वर्षा हरिः|	heglideth like a serpent from his ancient skin and like a playful horse the tawny steer hath run.
अग्रेगो राजाप्यस्तविष्यते विमानो अह्नां भुवनेष्वर्पितः|	dweller in floods king foremost he displays his might set among living things as measurer of days.
हरिर्घ्र्तस्नुः सुद्र्शीको अर्णवो जयोतीरथः पवते राय ओक्यः|	distilling oil he flows fair billowy goldenhued borne on a car of light sharing one home with wealth.
असर्जि सकम्भो दिव उद्यतो मदः परि तरिधातुर्भुवनान्यर्षति|	loosed is the heavens support the uplifted cheering juice the triplymingled draught flows round into the worlds.
अंशुं रिहन्ति मतयः पनिप्नतं गिरा यदि निर्णिजं रग्मिणो ययुः|	the holy hymns caress the stalk that claims our praise when singers have approached his beauteous robe with song.
पर ते धारा अत्यण्वानि मेष्यः पुनानस्य संयतो यन्तिरंहयः|	thy strearns that flow forth rapidly collected run over the fine fleece of the sheep as thou art cleansed.
यद गोभिरिन्दो चम्वोः समज्यस आ सुवानः सोम कलशेषु सीदसि|	when indu thou art balmed with milk within the bowl thou sinkest in the jars o soma when expressed.
पवस्व सोम करतुविन न उक्थ्योअव्यो वारे परि धाव मधु परियम|	winner of power flow soma worthy of our laud run onward to the fleece as wellbeloved meath.
जहि विश्वान रक्षस इन्दो अत्रिणो बर्हद वदेम विदथेसुवीराः|	destroy o indu all voracious rākṣasas with brave sons in the assembly let our speech be bold.
एते सोमा अभि परियम इन्द्रस्य कामम अक्षरन|	obeying indras dear desire these soma juices have flowed forth.
वर्धन्तो अस्य वीर्यम|	increasing his heroic might.
पुनानासश चमूषदो गछन्तो वायुम अश्विना|	laid in the bowl pureflowing on to vāyu and the aśvins may.
ते नो धान्तु सुवीर्यम|	these give us great heroic strength.
इन्द्रस्य सोम राधसे पुनानो हार्दि चोदय|	soma as thou art purified incite to bounty indras heart.
रतस्य योनिम आसदम|	to sit in place of sacrifice.
मर्जन्ति तवा दश कषिपो हिन्वन्ति सप्त धीतयः|	the ten swift fingers deck thee forth seven ministers impel thee on.
अनु विप्रा अमादिषुः|	the sages have rejoiced in thee.
देवेभ्यस तवा मदाय कं सर्जानम अति मेष्यः|	when through the filter thou art poured we clothe thee with a robe of milk.
सं गोभिर वासयामसि|	to be a gladdening draught for gods.
पुनानः कलशेष्व आ वस्त्राण्य अरुषो हरिः|	when purified within the jars soma brightred and goldenhued.
परि गव्यान्य अव्यत|	hath clothed him with a robe of milk.
मघोन आ पवस्व नो जहि विश्वा अप दविषः|	flow on to us and make us rich drive all our enemies away.
इन्दो सखायम आ विश|	o indu flow into thy friend.
वर्ष्टिं दिवः परि सरव दयुम्नम पर्थिव्या अधि|	send down the rain from heaven a stream of opulence from earth give us.
सहो नः सोम पर्त्सु धाः|	o soma victory in war.
नर्चक्षसं तवा वयम इन्द्रपीतं सवर्विदम|	may we obtain thee indras drink who viewest men and findest light.
भक्षीमहि परजाम इषम|	gain thee and progeny and food.
पवस्व दक्षसाधनो देवेभ्यः पीतये हरे|	greenhued as one who giveth strength flow on for gods to drink a draught.
मरुद्भ्यो वायवे मदः|	for vāyu and the marut host.
पवमान धिया हितोअभि योनिं कनिक्रदत|	o pavamana sent by song roaring about thy dwellingplace.
धर्मणा वायुमा विश|	pass into vāyu as law bids.
सं देवैः शोभते वर्षा कविर्योनावधि परियः|	the steer shines with the deities dear sage in his appointed home.
वर्त्रहा देववीतमः|	foeslayer most beloved by gods.
विश्वा रूपाण्याविशन पुनानो याति हर्यतः|	taking each beauteous form he goes desirable while purified.
यत्राम्र्तास आसते|	thither where the immortals sit.
अरुषो जनयन गिरः सोमः पवत आयुषक|	to indra soma flows the red engendering song exceeding wise.
इन्द्रं गछन कविक्रतुः|	the visitor of living men.
आ पवस्व मदिन्तम पवित्रं धारया कवे|	flow best exhilarator sage flow to the filter in a stream.
अर्कस्य योनिमासदम|	to seat thee in the place of song.
पर राजा वाचं जनयन्नसिष्यददपो वसानो अभि गा इयक्षति|	raising his voice the king hath flowed upon his way invested with the waters he would win the kine.
गर्भ्णाति रिप्रमविरस्य तान्वा शुद्धो देवानामुप याति निष्क्र्तम|	the fleece retains his solid parts as though impure and bright and cleansed he seeks the special place of gods.
इन्द्राय सोम परि षिच्यसे नर्भिर्न्र्चक्षा ऊर्मिः कविरज्यसे वने|	thou soma art effused for indra by the men balmed in the wood as wave sage viewer of mankind.
पूर्वीर्हि ते सरुतयः सन्ति यातवे सहस्रमश्वा हरयश्चमूषदः|	full many are the paths whereon thou mayest go a thousand bay steeds hast thou resting in the bowls.
समुद्रिया अप्सरसो मनीषिणमासीना अन्तरभि सोममक्षरन|	apsarases who dwell in waters of the sea sitting within have flowed to soma wise of heart.
ता ईं हिन्वन्ति हर्म्यस्य सक्षणिं याचन्ते सुम्नं पवमानमक्षितम|	they urge the master of the house upon his way and to the eternal pavamana pray for bliss.
गोजिन नः सोमो रथजिद धिरण्यजित सवर्जिदब्जित पवते सहस्रजित|	soma flows on for us as winner of the kine winner of thousands cars water and light and gold.
यं देवासश्चक्रिरे पीतये मदं सवादिष्ठं दरप्समरुणं मयोभुवम|	he whom the gods have made a gladdening draught to drink the drop most sweet to taste wealbringing red of hue.
एतानि सोम पवमानो अस्मयुः सत्यानि कर्ण्वन दरविणान्यर्षसि|	soma as pavamana thou our faithful friend making for us these real treasures flowest on.
जहि शत्रुमन्तिके दूरके च य उर्वीं गव्यूतिमभयं च नस कर्धि|	slay thou the enemy both near andfar away grant us security and ample pasturage.
एते धावन्तीन्दवः सोमा इन्द्राय घर्ष्वयः|	to indra flow these running drops these somas frolicsome in mood.
मत्सरासःस्वर्विदः|	exhilarating finding light.
परव्र्ण्वन्तो अभियुजः सुष्वये वरिवोविदः|	driving off foes bestowing room upon the presser willingly.
सवयं सतोत्रे वयस्क्र्तः|	bringing their praiser vitalforce.
वर्था करीळन्त इन्दवः सधस्थमभ्येकमित|	lightly disporting them the drops flow to one common reservoir.
सिन्धोरूर्मा वयक्षरन|	and fall into the rivers wave.
एते विश्वानि वार्या पवमानास आशत|	these pavamanas have obtained all blessings much to be desired.
हिता न सप्तयो रथे|	like coursers harnessed to a car.
आस्मिन पिशङगमिन्दवो दधाता वेनमादिशे|	with view to us o somadrops bestow his manifold desire.
यो अस्मभ्यमरावा|	on him who yet hath given us naught.
रभुर्न रथ्यं नवं दधाता केतमादिशे|	bring us our wish with this design as a wright brings his newwrought wheel.
शुक्राः पवध्वमर्णसा|	flow pure and shining with the stream.
एत उ तये अवीवशन काष्ठां वाजिनो अक्रत|	these drops have cried with resonant voice like swift steeds they have run the course.
सतः परासाविषुर्मतिम|	and roused the good mans hymn to life.
परि पर धन्वेन्द्राय सोम सवादुर मित्राय पूष्णे भगाय|	pleasant to indras mitras pūṣans bhagas taste sped onward soma with thy flowing stream.
इन्द्रस ते सोम सुतस्य पेयाः करत्वे दक्षाय विश्वे च देवाः|	let indra drink o soma of thy juice for wisdom and all deities for strength.
एवाम्र्ताय महे कषयाय स शुक्रो अर्ष दिव्यः पीयूषः|	so flow thou on as bright celestial juice flow to the vast immortal dwellingplace.
पवस्व सोम महान समुद्रः पिता देवानां विश्वाभि धाम|	flow onward soma as a mighty sea as father of the gods to every form.
शुक्रः पवस्व देवेभ्यः सोम दिवे पर्थिव्यै शं च परजायै|	flow on o soma radiant for the gods and heaven and earth and bless our progeny.
दिवो धर्तासि शुक्रः पीयूषः सत्ये विधर्मन वाजी पवस्व|	thou bright juice art sustainer of the sky flow mighty in accordance with true law.
पवस्व सोम दयुम्नी सुधारो महाम अवीनाम अनु पूर्व्यः|	soma flow splendid with thy copious stream through the great fleece as in the olden time.
नर्भिर येमानो जज्ञानः पूतः कषरद विश्वानि मन्द्रः सवर्वित|	bom led by men joyous and purified let the lightfinder make all blessings flow.
इन्दुः पुनानः परजाम उराणः करद विश्वानि दरविणानि नः|	indu while cleansed keeping the people safe shall give us all possessions for our own.
पवस्व सोम करत्वे दक्षायाश्वो न निक्तो वाजी धनाय|	flow on for wisdom soma and for power as a strong courser bathed to win the prize.
तं ते सोतारो रसम मदाय पुनन्ति सोमम महे दयुम्नाय|	the pressers purify this juice of thine the soma for delight and lofty fame.
शिशुं जज्ञानं हरिम मर्जन्ति पवित्रे सोमं देवेभ्य इन्दुम|	they deck the goldhued infant newlyborn even soma indu in the sieve for gods.
इन्दुः पविष्ट चारुर मदायापाम उपस्थे कविर भगाय|	fair indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy sage for good fortune in the waters lap.
बिभर्ति चार्व इन्द्रस्य नाम येन विश्वानि वर्त्रा जघान|	he bears the beauteous name of indra that wherewith he overcame all demon foes.
पिबन्त्य अस्य विश्वे देवासो गोभिः शरीतस्य नर्भिः सुतस्य|	all deities are wont to drink of him pressed by the men and blent with milk and curds.
पर सुवानो अक्षाः सहस्रधारस तिरः पवित्रं वि वारम अव्यम|	he hath flowed forth with thousand streams effused flowed ihsough the filter and the sheeps long wool.
स वाज्य अक्षाः सहस्ररेता अद्भिर मर्जानो गोभिः शरीणानः|	with endless genial flow the strong hath run purified by the waters blent with milk.
पर सोम याहीन्द्रस्य कुक्षा नर्भिर येमानो अद्रिभिः सुतः|	pressed out with stones directed by the men go fortli o soma into indras throat.
असर्जि वाजी तिरः पवित्रम इन्द्राय सोमः सहस्रधारः|	the mighty soma with a thousand streams is poured to indra through the cleansing sieve.
अञ्जन्त्य एनम मध्वो रसेनेन्द्राय वर्ष्ण इन्दुम मदाय|	indu they balm with pleasant milky juice for indra for the steer for his delight.
देवेभ्यस तवा वर्था पाजसे ऽपो वसानं हरिम मर्जन्ति|	lightly for sheen they cleanse thee for the gods goldcoloured wearing water as thy robe.
इन्दुर इन्द्राय तोशते नि तोशते शरीणन्न उग्रो रिणन्न अपः|	indu to indra streams yea downward streams strong flowing to the floods and mingling there.
कनिक्रन्ति हरिरा सर्ज्यमानः सीदन वनस्य जठरे पुनानः|	loud neighs the tawny steed when started settling deep in the wooden vessel while they cleanse him.
नर्भिर्यतः कर्णुते निर्णिजं गा अतो मतीर्जनयतस्वधाभिः|	led by the men he takes the milk for raiment then shall he through his powers engender praisesongs.
हरिः सर्जानः पथ्यां रतस्येयर्ति वाचमरितेव नावम|	as one who rows drives on his boat he goldhued sends forth his voice loosed on the path of order.
देवो देवानां गुह्यानि नामाविष कर्णोति बर्हिषि परवाचे|	as god the secret names of gods he utters to be declared on sacred grass more widely.
अपामिवेदूर्मयस्तर्तुराणाः पर मनीषा ईरते सोममछ|	hastening onward like the waves of waters our holy hymns are pressing nigh to soma.
नमस्यन्तीरुप च यन्ति सं चा च विशन्त्युशतीरुशन्तम|	to him they come with lowly adoration and longing enter him who longs to meet them.
तं मर्म्र्जानं महिषं न सानावंशुं दुहन्त्युक्षणं गिरिष्ठाम|	they drain the stalk the steer who dwells on mountains even as a bull who decks him on the upland.
तं वावशानं मतयः सचन्ते तरितो बिभर्ति वरुणं समुद्रे|	hymns follow and attend him as he bellows trita bears varuṇa aloft in ocean.
इष्यन वाचमुपवक्तेव होतुः पुनान इन्दो वि षया मनीषाम|	sending thy voice out as director loosen the invokers thought o indu as they cleanse thee.
इन्द्रश्च यत कषयथः सौभगाय सुवीर्यस्य पतयःस्याम|	while thou and indra rule for our advantage may we be masters of heroic vigour.
पर देवमछा मधुमन्त इन्दवोअसिष्यदन्त गाव आ न धेनवः|	the drops of soma juice like cows who yield their milk have flowed forth rich in meath unto the shining one.
बर्हिषदो वचनावन्त ऊधभिः परिस्रुतमुस्रियानिर्णिजं धिरे|	and seated on the grass raising their voice assumed the milk the covering robe wherewith the udders stream.
स रोरुवदभि पूर्वा अचिक्रददुपारुहः शरथयन सवादतेहरिः|	he bellows with a roar arourd the highest twigs the tawny one is sweetened as he breaks them up.
तिरः पवित्रमप्रियन्नुरु जरयो नि शर्याणि दधते देव आ वरम|	then passing through the sieve into the ample room the god throws off the dregs according to his wish.
वि यो ममे यम्या संयती मदः साकंव्र्धा पयसा पिन्वदक्षिता|	the gladdening drink that measured out the meeting twins fills full with milk the eternal everwaxing pair.
मही अपारे रजसी विवेविददभिव्रजन्नक्षितं पाज आ ददे|	bringing to light the two great regions limitless moving above them he gained sheen that never fades.
स मातरा विचरन वाजयन्नपः पर मेधिरः सवधया पिन्वते पदम|	wandering through the parents strengthening the floods the sage makes his place swell with his own native might.
अंशुर्यवेन पिपिशे यतो नर्भिः सं जामिभिर्नसते रक्षते शिरः|	the stalk is mixed with grain he comes led by the men together with the sisters and preserves the head.
सं दक्षेण मनसा जायते कविरतस्य गर्भो निहितो यमा परः|	with energetic intellect the sage is born deposited as germ of law far from the twins.
यूना ह सन्ता परथमं वि जज्ञतुर्गुहा हितं जनिम नेममुद्यतम|	they being young at first showed visibly distinct the creature that is halfconcealed and halfexposed.
मन्द्रस्य रूपं विविदुर्मनीषिणः शयेनो यदन्धो अभरत परावतः|	the sages knew the form of him the gladdener what time the falcon brought the plant from far away.
तं मर्जयन्त सुव्र्धं नदीष्वा उशन्तमंशुं परियन्तं रग्मियम|	him who assures success they beautified in streams the stalk who yearned therefor mighty and meet for praise.
तवां मर्जन्ति दश योषणः सुतं सोम रषिभिर्मतिभिर्धीतिभिर्हितम|	together with the Ṛṣis with their prayers and hymns ten women deck thee soma friendly when effused.
अव्यो वारेभिरुत देवहूतिभिर्न्र्भिर्यतोवाजमा दर्षि सातये|	led by the men with invocations of the gods through the fleece thou hast given us strength to win the spoil.
परिप्रयन्तं वय्यं सुषंसदं सोमं मनीषा अभ्यनूषत सतुभः|	songs resonant with praise have celebrated him soma friend springing forth with his fair company.
यो धारया मधुमानूर्मिणा दिव इयर्ति वाचं रयिषाळ अमर्त्यः|	even him who rich in meath with undulating stream winnner of wealth immortal sends his voice from heaven.
अयं दिव इयर्ति विश्वमा रजः सोमः पुनानः कलशेषु सीदति|	he sends it into all the region forth from heaven soma while he is filtcred settles in the jars.
अद्भिर्गोभिर्म्र्ज्यते अद्रिभिः सुतः पुनान इन्दुर्वरिवो विदत परियम|	with milk and waters is he decked when pressed with stones indu when purified shall find sweet rest and room.
एवा नः सोम परिषिच्यमानो वयो दधच्चित्रतमं पवस्व|	even thus poured forth how on thy way o soma vouchsafing us most manifold lively vigour.
अद्वेषे दयावाप्र्थिवी हुवेम देवा धत्त रयिमस्मे सुवीरम|	we will invoke benevolent earth and heaven give us ye gods riches with noble heroes.
एष कविरभिष्टुतः पवित्रे अधि तोशते|	this sage exalted by our lauds flows to the purifying cloth.
पुनानो घनन्नप सरिधः|	scattering foes as he is cleansed.
एष इन्द्राय वायवे सवर्जित परि षिच्यते|	as giving power and winning light for indra and for vāyu he.
पवित्रे दक्षसाधनः|	is poured upon the filteringcloth.
एष नर्भिर्वि नीयते दिवो मूर्धा वर्षा सुतः|	the men conduct him soma steer omniscient and the head of heaven.
सोमो वनेषु विश्ववित|	effused into the vats of wood.
एष गव्युरचिक्रदत पवमानो हिरण्ययुः|	longing for kine longing for gold hath indu pavamana lowed.
इन्दुः सत्राजिदस्त्र्तः|	still conqueror never overcome.
एष सूर्येण हासते पवमानो अधि दयवि|	this pavamana gladdening draught drops on the filtering cloth and then.
पवित्रे मत्सरो मदः|	mounts up with sūrya to the sky.
एष शुष्म्यसिष्यददन्तरिक्षे वर्षा हरिः|	to indra in the firmament this mighty tawny steer hath flowed.
पुनान इन्दुरिन्द्रमा|	this indu being purified.
सना च सोम जेषि च पवमान महि शरवः|	o soma flowing on thy way win thou and conquer high renown.
अथा नो वस्यसस कर्धि|	and make us better than we are.
सना जयोतिः सना सवर्विश्वा च सोम सौभगा|	win thou the light win heavenly light and soma all felicities.
अथा|	and make us better than we are.
सना दक्षमुत करतुमप सोम मर्धो जहि|	win skilful strength and mental power o soma drive away our foes.
अथा|	and make us better than we are.
पवीतारः पुनीतन सोममिन्द्राय पातवे|	ye purifiers purify soma for indra for his drink.
अथा|	make thou us better than we are.
तवं सूर्ये न आ भज तव करत्वा तवोतिभिः|	give us our portion in the sun through thine own mental power and aids.
अथा|	and make us better than we are.
तव करत्वा तवोतिभिर्ज्योक पश्येम सूर्यम|	through thine own mental power and aid long may we look upon the sun.
अथा|	make thou us better than we are.
अभ्यर्ष सवायुध सोम दविबर्हसं रयिम|	wellweaponed soma pour to usa stream of riches doubly great.
अथा|	and make us better than we are.
अभ्यर्षानपच्युतो रयिं समत्सु सासहिः|	as one victorious unsubdued in battle pour forth wealth to us.
अथा|	and make us better than we are.
तवां यज्ञैरवीव्र्धन पवमान विधर्मणि|	by worship pavamana men have strengthened thee to prop the law.
अथा|	make thou us better than we are.
रयिं नश्चित्रमश्विनमिन्दो विश्वायमा भर|	o indu bring us wealth in steeds manifold quickening all life.
अथा|	and mate us better than we are.
असर्जि वक्वा रथ्ये यथाजौ धिया मनोता परथमो मनीषी|	as for a chariotrace the skilful speaker chief sage inventor hath with song been started.
दश सवसारो अधि सानो अव्येअजन्ति वह्निं सदनान्यछ|	the sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the carhorse to the resting places.
वीती जनस्य दिव्यस्य कव्यैरधि सुवानो नहुष्येभिरिन्दुः|	the drop of soma pressed by wise nahusyas becomes the banquet of the heavenly people.
पर यो नर्भिरम्र्तो मर्त्येभिर्मर्म्र्जानोअविभिर्गोभिरद्भिः|	indu by hands of mortal men made beauteous immortal with the sheep and cows and waters.
वर्षा वर्ष्ने रोरुवदंशुरस्मै पवमानो रुशदीर्ते पयोगोः|	steer roaring unto steer this pavamana this juice runs to the white milk of the milchcow.
सहस्रं रक्वा पथिभिर्वचोविदध्वस्मभिः सूरो अण्वं वि याति|	through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful singer like sūra by his fair and open pathways.
रुजा दर्ळ्हा चिद रक्षसः सदांसि पुनान इन्द ऊर्णुहि विवाजान|	break down the strong seats even of the demons cleansing thee indu robd thyself in vigour.
वर्श्चोपरिष्टात तुजता वधेन ये अन्ति दूरादुपनायमेषाम|	rend with thy swift bolt coming from above them those who are near and those who yet are distant.
स परत्नवन नव्यसे विश्ववार सूक्ताय पथः कर्णुहि पराचः|	prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the new bymn thou giver of all bounties.
ये दुःषहासो वनुषा बर्हन्तस्तांस्ते अश्याम पुरुक्र्त पुरुक्षो|	those which are high and hard for foes to conquer may we gain from thee active foodbestower.
एवा पुनानो अपः सवर्गा अस्मभ्यं तोका तनयानि भूरि|	so purifying thee vouchsafe us waters heavens light and cows offipring and many children.
शं नः कषेत्रमुरु जयोतींषि सोम जयों नः सूर्यन्द्र्शये रिरीहि|	give us health ample land and lights o soma and grant us long to look upon the sunshine.
एष पर कोशे मधुमानचिक्रददिन्द्रस्य वज्रो वपुषो वपुष्टरः|	more beauteous than the beautiful as indras bolt this soma rich in sweets hath clamoured in the vat.
अभीं रतस्य सुदुघा घर्तश्चुतो वाश्रा अर्षन्तिपयसेव धेनवः|	dropping with oil abundant streams of sacrifice flow unto him like milchkine lowing with their milk.
स पूर्व्यः पवते यं दिवस परि शयेनो मथायदिषितस्तिरो रजः|	on flows that ancient one whom hitherward from heaven sped through the region of the air the falcon snatched.
स मध्व आ युवते वेविजान इत कर्शानोरस्तुर्मनसाह बिभ्युषा|	he quivering with alarm and terrified in heart before bowarmed kṛśānu holdeth fast the sweet.
ते नः पूर्वास उपरास इन्दवो महे वाजाय धन्वन्तु गोमते|	may those first freshest drops of soma juice effused flow on their way to bring us mighty strength in kine.
ईक्षेण्यासो अह्यो न चारवो बरह्मबरह्म ये जुजुषुर्हविर हविः|	beauteous as serpents worthy to be looked upon they whom each sacred gift and all our prayers have pleased.
अयं नो विद्वान वनवद वनुष्यत इन्दुः सत्राचा मनसा पुरुष्टुतः|	may that muchlauded indu with a heart inclined to us wellknowing fight against our enemies.
इनस्य यः सदने गर्भमादधे गवामुरुब्जमभ्यर्षति वरजम|	he who hath brought the germ beside the strong ones seat moves onward to the widelyopcned stall of kine.
चक्रिर्दिवः पवते कर्त्व्यो रसो महानदब्धो वरुणो हुरुग्यते|	the active potent juice of heaven is flowing on great varuṇa whom the forward man can neer deceive.
असावि मित्रो वर्जनेषु यज्ञियोअत्यो न यूथे वर्षयुः कनिक्रदत|	mitra the holy hath been pressed for troubled times neighing like an impatient horse amid the herd.
सोमः पुनानो अर्षति सहस्रधारो अत्यविः|	passed through the fleece in thousand streams the soma purified flows on.
वायोरिन्द्रस्यनिष्क्र्तम|	to indras viyus special place.
पवमानमवस्यवो विप्रमभि पर गायत|	sing forth ye men who long for help to pavamana to the sage.
सुष्वाणं देववीतये|	effused to entertain the gods.
पवन्ते वाजसातये सोमाः सहस्रपाजसः|	the somadrops with thousand powers are purified for victory.
गर्णाना देववीतये|	hymned to become the feast of gods.
उत नो वाजसातये पवस्व बर्हतीरिषः|	yea as thou flowest bring great store of food that we may win the spoil.
दयुमदिन्दो सुवीर्यम|	indu bring splendid manly might.
ते नः सहस्रिणं रयिं पवन्तामा सुवीर्यम|	may they in flowing give us wealth in thousands and heroic power.
सुवाना देवास इन्दवः|	these godlike somadrops effused.
अत्या हियाना न हेत्र्भिरस्र्ग्रं वाजसातये|	like coursers by their drivers urged they were poured forth for victory.
वि वारमव्यमाशवः|	swift through the woollen strainingcloth.
वाश्रा अर्षन्तीन्दवोअभि वत्सं न धेनवः|	noisily flow the somadrops like milchkine lowing to their calves.
दधन्विरेगभस्त्योः|	they have run forth from both the hands.
जुष्ट इन्द्राय मत्सरः पवमान कनिक्रदत|	as gladdener whom indra loves o pavamana with a roar.
विश्वा अप दविषो जहि|	drive all our enemies away.
अपघ्नन्तो अराव्णः पवमानाः सवर्द्र्शः|	o pavamamas driving off the godless looking on the light.
योनाव रतस्य सीदत|	sit in the place of sacrifice.
यत सोम चित्रमुक्थ्यं दिव्यं पार्थिवं वसु|	o soma being purified bring us the wondrous treasure meet.
तन नः पुनान आ भर|	for lauds that is in earth and heaven.
युवं हि सथः सवर्पती इन्द्रश्च सोम गोपती|	for ye twain indra soma are lords of the light lords of the kine.
ईशानापिप्यतं धियः|	great rulers prosper ye our songs.
वर्षा पुनान आयुषु सतनयन्नधि बर्हिषि|	the tawny steer while cleansed among the living bellowing on the grass.
हरिः सन योनिमासदत|	hath sunk and settled in his home.
अवावशन्त धीतयो वर्षभस्याधि रेतसि|	over the steers productive flow the sacred songs were resonant.
सूनोर्वत्सस्यमातरः|	the mothers of the darling son.
कुविद वर्षण्यन्तीभ्यः पुनानो गर्भमादधत|	hath he not purified impregned the kine whb long to meet their lord.
याः शुक्रं दुहते पयः|	the kine who yield the shining milk.
उप शिक्षापतस्थुषो भियसमा धेहि शत्रुषु|	bring near us those who stand aloof strike fear into our enemies.
पवमानविदा रयिम|	o pavamana find us wealth.
नि शत्रोः सोम वर्ष्ण्यं नि शुष्मं नि वयस्तिर|	soma bring down the foemans might his vigorous strength and vital power.
दूरेवा सतो अन्ति वा|	whether he be afar or near.
समिद्धो विश्वतस पतिः पवमानो वि राजति|	enkindled pavamana lord sends forth his light on every side.
परीणन वर्षा कनिक्रदत|	in friendly show the bellowing bull.
तनूनपात पवमानः शर्ङगे शिशानो अर्षति|	he pavamana selfproduced speeds onward sharpening his horns.
अन्तरिक्षेण रारजत|	he glitters through the firmament.
ईळेन्यः पवमानो रयिर्वि राजति दयुमान|	brilliant like wealth adorable with splendour pavamana shines.
मधोर्धाराभिरोजसा|	mightily with the streams of meath.
बर्हिः पराचीनमोजसा पवमान सत्र्णन हरिः|	the tawny pavamana who strews from of old the grass with might.
देवेषु देव ईयते|	is worshipped god amid the gods.
उदातैर्जिहते बर्हद दवारो देवीर्हिरण्ययीः|	the golden the celestial doors are lifted with their frames on high.
पवमानेन सुष्टुताः|	by pavamana glorified.
सुशिल्पे बर्हती मही पवमानो वर्षण्यति|	with passion pavamana longs for the great lofty pair wellformed.
नक्तोषासा नदर्शते|	like beauteous maidens night and dawn.
उभा देवा नर्चक्षसा होतारा दैव्या हुवे|	both gods who look on men i call celestial heralds indras self.
पवमान इन्द्रोव्र्षा|	is pavamana yea the bull.
भारती पवमानस्य सरस्वतीळा मही|	this pavamanas sacrifice shall the three beauteous goddesses.
इमं नो यज्ञमा गमन तिस्रो देवीः सुपेशसः|	sarasvatī and bhāratī and iḷā mighty one attend.
तवष्टारमग्रजां गोपां पुरोयावानमा हुवे|	summon tvaṣṭar hither our protector champion earliestborn.
इन्दुरिन्द्रो वर्षा हरिः पवमानः परजापतिः|	indu is indra tawny steer pavamana is prajāpati.
वनस्पतिं पवमान मध्वा समङगधि धारया|	o pavamana with the meath in streams anoint vanaspati.
सहस्रवल्शं हरितं भराजमानं हिरण्ययम|	the evergreen the goldenhued refulgent with a thousand boughs.
विश्वे देवाः सवाहाक्र्तिं पवमानस्या गत|	come to the consecrating rite of pavamana all ye gods.
वायुर्ब्र्हस्पतिः सूर्योअग्निरिन्द्रः सजोषसः|	vāyu sūrya bṛhaspati indra and agni in accord.
पर ये गावो न भूर्णयस्त्वेषा अयासो अक्रमुः|	active and bright have they come forth impetuous in speed like bulls.
घनन्तः कर्ष्णामप तवचम|	driving the black skin far away.
सुवितस्य मनामहेअति सेतुं दुराव्यम|	quelling the riteless dasyu may we think upon the bridge of bliss.
साह्वांसो दस्युमव्रतम|	leaving the bridge of woe behind.
शर्ण्वे वर्ष्टेरिव सवनः पवमानस्य शुष्मिणः|	the mighty pavamanas roar is heard as twere the rush of rain.
चरन्तिविद्युतो दिवि|	lightnings are flashing to the sky.
आ पवस्व महीमिषं गोमदिन्दो हिरण्यवत|	pour out on us abundant food when thou art pressed o indu wealth.
अश्वावद वाजवत सुतः|	in kine and gold and steeds and spoil.
स पवस्व विचर्षण आ मही रोदसी पर्ण|	flow on thy way most active thou fill full the mighty heavens and earth.
उषाः सूर्यो न रश्मिभिः|	as dawn as sūrya with his beams.
परि णः शर्मयन्त्या धारया सोम विश्वतः|	on every side o soma flow round us with thy protecting stream.
सरा रसेव विष्टपम|	as rasā flows around the world.
परि सुवानो गिरिष्ठाः पवित्रे सोमो अक्षाः|	thou soma dweller on the hills effused hast flowed into the sieve.
मदेषु सर्वधा असि|	allbounteous art thou in carouse.
तवं विप्रस्त्वं कविर्मधु पर जातमन्धसः|	thou art a sacred bard a sage the meath is offipring of thy sap.
मदेषु|	allbountcous art thou in carouse.
तव विश्वे सजोषसो देवासः पीतिमाशत|	all deities of one accord have come that they may drink of thee.
मदेषु|	allbounteous art thou in carouse.
आ यो विश्वानि वार्या वसूनि हस्तयोर्दधे|	he who containeth in his hands all treasures much to be desired.
मदेषु|	allbounteous art thou in carouse.
य इमे रोदसी मही सं मातरेव दोहते|	who milketh out this mighty pair the earth and heaven like mother kine.
मदेषु|	allbounteous art thou in carouse.
परि यो रोदसी उभे सद्यो वाजेभिरर्षति|	who in a moment mightily floweth around these two worldhalvcs.
मदेषु|	allbounteous art thou in carouse.
स शुष्मी कलशेष्वा पुनानो अचिक्रदत|	the strong one being purified hath in the pitchers cried aloud.
मदेषु|	allbounteous art thou in carouse.
तमम्र्क्षन्त वाजिनमुपस्थे अदितेरधि|	the sages with the fingers art have dressed and decked that vigorous steed.
विप्रासो अण्व्याधिया|	upon the lap of aditi.
तं गावो अभ्यनूषत सहस्रधारमक्षितम|	the kine have called aloud to him exhaustless with a thousand streams.
इन्दुं धर्तारमा दिवः|	to indu who supporteth heaven.
तं वेधां मेधयाह्यन पवमानमधि दयवि|	him nourisher of many sage creative pavamana they.
धर्णसिं भूरिधायसम|	have sent by wisdom to the sky.
तमह्यन भुरिजोर्धिया संवसानं विवस्वतः|	him dweller with vivasvān they with use of both arms have sent forth.
पतिं वाचो अदाभ्यम|	the lord of speech infallible.
तं सानावधि जामयो हरिं हिन्वन्त्यद्रिभिः|	him green beloved many eyed the sisters with prosing stones.
हर्यतम्भूरिचक्षसम|	send down to ridges of the sieve.
तं तवा हिन्वन्ति वेधसः पवमान गिराव्र्धम|	o pavamana indu priests hurry thee on to indra thee.
इन्दविन्द्राय मत्सरम|	who aidest song and cheerest him.
परि परासिष्यदत कविः सिन्धोरूर्मावधि शरितः|	reposing on the rivers wave the sage hath widely flowed around.
कारं बिभ्रत पुरुस्प्र्हम|	bearing the hymn which many love.
गिरा यदी सबन्धवः पञ्च वराता अपस्यवः|	when the five kindred companies active in duty with the song.
परिष्क्र्ण्वन्ति धर्णसिम|	establish him the powerful.
आदस्य शुष्मिणो रसे विश्वे देवा अमत्सत|	then in his juice whose strength is great have all the gods rejoiced themselves.
यदी गोभिर्वसायते|	when he hath clothed him in the milk.
निरिणानो वि धावति जहच्छर्याणि तान्वा|	freeing himself he flows away leaving his bodys severed limbs.
अत्रा सं जिघ्नते युजा|	and meets his own companion here.
नप्तीभिर्यो विवस्वतः शुभ्रो न माम्र्जे युवा|	he by the daughters of the priest like a fair youth hath been adorned.
गाः कर्ण्वानो न निर्णिजम|	making the milk as twere his robe.
अति शरिती तिरश्चता गव्या जिगात्यण्व्या|	oer the fine fingers through desire of milk in winding course he goes.
वग्नुमियर्ति यं विदे|	and utters voice which he hath found.
अभि कषिपः समग्मत मर्जयन्तीरिषस पतिम|	the nimble fingers have approached adorning him the lord of strength.
पर्ष्ठा गर्भ्णत वाजिनः|	they grasp the vigorous coursers back.
परि दिव्यानि मर्म्र्शद विश्वानि सोम पार्थिवा|	comprising all the treasures that are in the heavens and on the earth.
वसूनि याह्यस्मयुः|	come soma as our faithful friend.
सरक्वे दरप्सस्य धमतः समस्वरन्न्र्तस्य योना समरन्तनाभयः|	they from the spouting drop have sounded at the rim naves speed together to the place of sacrifice.
तरीन स मूर्ध्नो असुरश्चक्र आरभे सत्यस्यनावः सुक्र्तमपीपरन|	that asura hath formed to seize three lofty heights the ships of truth have borne the pious man across.
सम्यक सम्यञ्चो महिषा अहेषत सिन्धोरूर्मावधि वेना अवीविपन|	the strong steers gathering have duly stirred themselvesand over the streams wave the friends sent forth the song.
मधोर्धाराभिर्जनयन्तो अर्कमित परियामिन्द्रस्य तन्वमवीव्र्धन|	engendering the hymn with flowing streams of meath indras dear body have they caused to wax in strength.
पवित्रवन्तः परि वाचमासते पितैषां परत्नो अभि रक्षति वरतम|	with sanctifying gear they sit around the song their ancient father guards their holy work from harm.
महः समुद्रं वरुणस्तिरो दधे धीरा इच्छेकुर्धरुणेष्वारभम|	varuṇa hath oerspread the mighty sea of air sages had power to hold him in sustaining floods.
सहस्रधारेअव ते समस्वरन दिवो नाके मधुजिह्वा असश्चतः|	sweettongued exhaustless they have sent their voices down togetlier in heavens vault that pours a thousand streams.
अस्य सपशो न नि मिषन्ति भूर्णयः पदेपदे पाशिनः सन्ति सेतवः|	his wildlyrestless warders never close an eye in every place are found the bonds that bind man last.
पितुर्मातुरध्या ये समस्वरन्न्र्चा शोचन्तः सन्दहन्तो अव्रतान|	oer sire and mother they have roared in unison bright with the verse of praise burning up riteless men.
इन्द्रद्विष्टामप धमन्ति मायया तवचमसिक्नीं भूमनो दिवस परि|	blowing away with supernatural might from earth and from the heavens the swarthy skin which indra hates.
परत्नान मानादध्या ये समस्वरञ्छ्लोकयन्त्रासो रभसस्य मन्तवः|	those which as guides of song and counsellors of speed were manifested from their ancient dwelling place.
अपानक्षासो बधिरा अहासत रतस्य पन्थां न तरन्ति दुष्क्र्तः|	from these the eyeless and the deaf have turned aside the wicked travel not the pathway of the law.
सहस्रधारे वितते पवित्र आ वाचं पुनन्ति कवयो मनीषिणः|	what time the filter with a thousand streams is stretched the thoughtful sages purify their song therein.
रुद्रास एषामिषिरासो अद्रुह सपशः सवञ्चः सुद्र्शो नर्चक्षसः|	brightcoloured are their spies vigorous void of guile excellent fair to see beholders of mankind.
रतस्य गोपा न दभाय सुक्रतुस्त्री ष पवित्रा हर्द्यन्तरा दधे|	guardian of law most wise he may not be deceived three purifiers hath he set within his heart.
विद्वान स विश्वा भुवनाभि पश्यत्यवाजुष्टान विध्यति कर्ते अव्रतान|	with wisdom he beholds all creatures that exist he drives into the pit the hated riteliess ones.
रतस्य तन्तुर्विततः पवित्र आ जिह्वाया अग्रे वरुणस्य मायया|	the thread of sacrifice spun in the cleansing sieve on varuṇas tonguetip by supernatural might.
धीराश्चित तत समिनक्षन्त आशतात्रा कर्तमव पदात्यप्रभुह|	this by their striving have the prudent ones attained he who hath not this power shall sink into the pit.
अस्र्ग्रम इन्दवः पथा धर्मन्न रतस्य सुश्रियः|	forth on their way the glorious drops have flowed for maintenance of law.
विदाना अस्य योजनम|	knowing this sacrifices course.
पर धारा मध्वो अग्रियो महीर अपो वि गाहते|	down in the mighty waters sinks the stream of meath most excellent.
हविर हविष्षु वन्द्यः|	oblation best of all in worth.
पर युजो वाचो अग्रियो वर्षाव चक्रदद वने|	about the holy place the steer true guileless noblest hath sent forth.
सद्माभि सत्यो अध्वरः|	continuous voices in the wood.
परि यत काव्या कविर नर्म्णा वसानो अर्षति|	when clothed in manly strength the sage flows in celestial wisdom round.
सवर वाजी सिषासति|	the strong would win the light of heaven.
पवमानो अभि सप्र्धो विशो राजेव सीदति|	when purified he sits as king above the hosts among his folk.
यद ईम रण्वन्ति वेधसः|	what time the sages bring him nigh.
अव्यो वारे परि परियो हरिर वनेषु सीदति|	dear goldencoloured in the fleece he sinks and settles in the wood.
रेभो वनुष्यते मती|	the singer shows his zeal in hymns.
स वायुम इन्द्रम अश्विना साकम मदेन गछति|	he goes to indra vāyu to the aśvins as his custom is.
रणा यो अस्य धर्मभिः|	with gladdening juice which gives them joy.
आ मित्रावरुणा भगम मध्वः पवन्त ऊर्मयः|	tle streams of pleasant soma flow to bhaga mitravaruṇa.
विदाना अस्य शक्मभिः|	wellknowing through his mighty powers.
अस्मभ्यं रोदसी रयिम मध्वो वाजस्य सातये|	heaven and earth riches of meath to win us wealth.
शरवो वसूनि सं जितम|	gain for us treasures and renown.
परि दयुक्षः सनद्रयिर्भरद वाजं नो अन्धसा|	wealthwinner dwelling in the sky bringing us vigour with the juice.
सुवानोर्ष पवित्र आ|	flow to the filter when effused.
तव परत्नेभिरध्वभिरव्यो वारे परि परियः|	so in thine ancient ways may he beloved with a thousand streams.
सहस्रधारो यात तना|	run oer the fleecy strainingcloth.
चरुर्न यस्तमीङखयेन्दो न दानमीङखय|	him who is like a caldron shake o indu shake thy gift to us.
वधैर्वधस्नवीङखय|	shake it armed warrior with thine arms.
नि शुष्ममिन्दवेषां पुरुहूत जनानाम|	indu invoked with many a prayer bring down the vigour of these men.
यो अस्मानादिदेशति|	of him who threatens us with war.
शतं न इन्द ऊतिभिः सहस्रं वा शुचीनाम|	indu wealthgiver with thine help pour out for us a hundred yea.
पवस्व मंहयद्रयिः|	a thousand of thy pure bright streams.
यवंयवं नो अन्धसा पुष्टमपुष्टं परि सरव|	pour on us with thy juice all kinds of corn each sort of nourishment.
सोम विश्वा च सौभगा|	and soma all felicities.
ईन्दो यथा तव सतवो यथा ते जातमन्धसः|	as thine o indu is the praise and thine what springeth from the juice.
नि बर्हिषि परिये सदः|	seat thee on the dear sacred grass.
उत नो गोविदश्ववित पवस्व सोमान्धसा|	and finding for us kine and steeds o soma with thy juice flow on.
मक्षूतमेभिरहभिः|	through days that fly most rapidly.
यो जिनाति न जीयते हन्ति शत्रुमभीत्य|	as one who conquers neer subdued attacks and stays the enemy.
स पवस्व सहस्रजित|	thus vanquisher of thousands flow.
अध्वर्यो अद्रिभिः सुतं सोमं पवित्र आ सर्ज|	adhvaryu on the filter pour the soma juice expressed with stones.
पुनीहीन्द्राय पातवे|	and make it pure for indras drink.
दिवः पीयूषमुत्तमं सोममिन्द्राय वज्रिणे|	pour out for indra thunderarmed the milk of heaven the somas juice.
सुनोता मधुमत्तमम|	most excellent most rich in sweets.
तव तय इन्दो अन्धसो देवा मधोर्व्यश्नते|	these gods and all the marut host indu enjoy this juice of thine.
पवमानस्य मरुतः|	this pavamanas flowing meath.
तवं हि सोम वर्धयन सुतो मदाय भूर्णये|	for soma thou hast been effused strengthening for the wild carouse.
वर्षन सतोतारमूतये|	o steer the singer for our help.
अभ्यर्ष विचक्षण पवित्रं धारया सुतः|	flow with thy stream farsighted one effused into the cleansing sieve.
अभि वाजमुत शरवः|	flow on to give us strength and fame.
इषुर्न धन्वन परति धीयते मतिर्वत्सो न मातुरुप सर्ज्यूधनि|	laid like an arrow on the bow the hymn hath been loosed like a young calf to the udder of its dam.
उरुधारेव दुहे अग्र आयत्यस्य वरतेष्वपि सोम इष्यते|	as one who cometh first with full stream she is milked the soma is impelled to this mans holy rites.
उपो मतिः पर्च्यते सिच्यते मधु मन्द्राजनी चोदते अन्तरासनि|	the thought is deeply fixed the savoury juice is shed the tongue with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth.
पवमानः सन्तनिः परघ्नतामिव मधुमान दरप्सः परि वारमर्षति|	and pavamana like the shout of combatants the drop rising in sweet juice is flowing through the fleece.
अव्ये वधूयुः पवते परि तवचि शरथ्नीते नप्तीरदितेरतं यते|	he flows about the sheepskin longing for a bride he looses aditis daughters for the worshipper.
हरिरक्रान यजतः संयतो मदो नर्म्णा शिशानो महिषो न शोभते|	the sacred drink hath come goldtinted wellrestrained like a strong bull he shines whetting his manly might.
उक्षा मिमाति परति यन्ति धेनवो देवस्य देवीरुप यन्ति निष्क्र्तम|	the bull is bellowing the cows are coming nigh the goddesses approach the gods own restingplace.
अत्यक्रमीदर्जुनं वारमव्ययमत्कं न निक्तम्परि सोमो अव्यत|	onward hath soma passed through the sheeps fair bright fleece and hath as twere endued a garment newly washed.
अम्र्क्तेन रुशता वाससा हरिरमर्त्यो निर्णिजानः परि वयत|	the goldenhued immortal newly bathed puts on a brightly shining vesture that is never harmed.
दिवस पर्ष्ठं बर्हणा निर्णिजे कर्तोपस्तरणं चम्वोर्नभस्मयम|	he made the ridge of heaven to be his radiant robe by sprinkling of the bowls from moisture of the sky.
सूर्यस्येव रश्मयो दरावयित्नवो मत्सरासः परसुपः साकमीरते|	even as the beams of sūrya urging men to speed that cheer and send to sleep together rush they forth.
तन्तुं ततं परि सर्गास आशवो नेन्द्राद रते पवते धाम किं चन|	these swift outpourings in long course of holy rites no form save only indra shows itself so pure.
सिन्धोरिव परवणे निम्न आशवो वर्षच्युता मदासो गातुमाशत|	as down the steep slope of a river to the vale drawn from the steer the swift strong draughts have found a way.
शं नो निवेशे दविपदे चतुष्पदेअस्मे वाजः सोम तिष्ठन्तु कर्ष्टयः|	well be it with the men and cattle in our home may powers o soma may the people stay with us.
आ नः पवस्व वसुमद धिरण्यवदश्वावद गोमद यवमत सुवीर्यम|	pour out upon us wealth in goods in gold in steeds in cattle and in corn and great heroic strength.
यूयं हि सोम पितरो मम सथन दिवो मूर्धानःप्रस्थिता वयस्क्र्तः|	ye soma are my fathers lifted up on high as heads of heaven and makers of the strength of life.
एते सोमाः पवमानास इन्द्रं रथा इव पर ययुः सातिमछ|	these pavamanas here these drops of soma to indra have sped forth like cars to booty.
सुताः पवित्रमति यन्त्यव्यं हित्वी वव्रिं हरितोव्र्ष्तिमछ|	effused they pass the cleansing fleece while goldhued they cast their covering off to pour the rain down.
इन्दविन्द्राय बर्हते पवस्व सुम्र्ळीको अनवद्यो रिशादाः|	o indu flow thou on for lofty indra flow blameless very gracious foedestroyer.
भरा चन्द्राणि गर्णते वसूनि देवैर्द्यावाप्र्थिवी परावतं नः|	bring splendid treasures to the man who lauds thee o heaven and earth with all the gods protect us.
पर सोमासः सवाध्यः पवमानासो अक्रमुः|	the somadrops benevolent come forth as they are purified.
रयिं कर्ण्वन्तिचेतनम|	bestowing wealth which all may see.
दिवस पर्थिव्या अधि भवेन्दो दयुम्नवर्धनः|	o indu high oer heaven and earth be thou increaser of our might.
भवा वाजानां पतिः|	the master of all strength be thou.
तुभ्यं वाता अभिप्रियस्तुभ्यमर्षन्ति सिन्धवः|	the winds are gracious in their love to thee the rivers flow to thee.
सोम वर्धन्ति ते महः|	soma they multiply thy power.
आ पयायस्व समेतु ते विश्वतः सोम वर्ष्ण्यम|	soma wax great from every side may vigorous powers unite in thee.
भवा वाजस्य संगथे|	be in the gatheringplace of strength.
तुभ्यं गावो घर्तं पयो बभ्रो दुदुह्रे अक्षितम|	for thee brownhued the kine have poured imperishable oil and milk.
वर्षिष्ठे अधि सानवि|	aloft on the sublimest height.
सवायुधस्य ते सतो भुवनस्य पते वयम|	friendship o indu we desire with thee who bearest noble arms.
इन्दो सखित्वमुश्मसि|	with thee o lord of all that is.
आ हर्यताय धर्ष्णवे धनुस्तन्वन्ति पौंस्यम|	they for the bold and lovely one ply manly vigour like a bow.
शुक्रांवयन्त्यसुराय निर्णिजं विपामग्रे महीयुवः|	joyous in front of songs they weave bright raiment for the lord divine.
अध कषपा परिष्क्र्तो वाजानभि पर गाहते|	and he made beautiful by night dips forward into strengthening food.
यदी विवस्वतो धियो हरिं हिन्वन्ति यातवे|	what time the sacrificers thoughts speed on his way the goldenhued.
तमस्य मर्जयामसि मदो य इन्द्रपातमः|	we cleanse this gladdening drink of his the juice which indra chiefly drinks.
यं गाव आसभिर्दधुः पुरा नूनं च सूरयः|	that which kine took into their mouths of old and princes take it now.
तं गाथया पुराण्या पुनानमभ्यनूषत|	to him while purifying they have raised the ancient psalm of praise.
उतो कर्पन्तधीतयो देवानां नाम बिभ्रतीः|	and sacred songs which bear the names of gods have supplicated him.
तमुक्षमाणमव्यये वारे पुनन्ति धर्णसिम|	they purify him as he drops courageous in the fleecy sieve.
दूतं न पूर्वचित्तय आ शासते मनीषिणः|	him they instruct as messenger to bear the sages morning prayer.
स पुनानो मदिन्तमः सोमश्चमूषु सीदति|	soma best cheerer takes his seat the while they cleanse him in the bowls.
पशौ न रेत आदधत पतिर्वचस्यते धियः|	he as it were impregns the cow and babbles on the lord of song.
स मर्ज्यते सुकर्मभिर्देवो देवेभ्यः सुतः|	he is effused and beautified a god for gods by skilful men.
विदे यदासु सन्ददिर्महीरपो वि गाहते|	he penetrates the mighty floods collecting all he knows therein.
सुत इन्दो पवित्र आ नर्भिर्यतो वि नीयसे|	pressed indu guided by the men thou art led to the cleaning sieve.
इन्द्राय मत्सरिन्तमश्चमूष्वा नि षीदसि|	thou yielding indra highest joy takest thy seat within the bowls.
उत ते शुष्मासो अस्थू रक्षो भिन्दन्तो अद्रिवः|	o thou with stones for arms thy powers crushing the fiends have raised themselves.
नुदस्व याः परिस्प्र्धः|	chase thou the foes who compass us.
अया निजघ्निरोजसा रथसंगे धने हिते|	thou conquerest thus with might when car meets car and when the prize is staked.
सतवा अबिभ्युषा हर्दा|	with fearless heart will i sing praise.
अस्य वरतानि नाध्र्षे पवमानस्य दूढ्या|	no one with evil thought assails this pavamanas holy laws.
रुज यस्त्वाप्र्तन्यति|	crush him who fain would fight with thee.
तं हिन्वन्ति मदच्युतं हरिं नदीषु वाजिनम|	for indra to the streams they drive the tawny rapturedropping steed.
इन्दुमिन्द्राय मत्सरम|	indu the bringer of delight.
पर सोमस्य पवमानस्योर्मय इन्द्रस्य यन्ति जठरं सुपेशसः|	onward to indras throat move beauteously adorned the waves of soma as he purifies himself.
दध्ना यदीमुन्नीता यशसा गवां दानाय शूरमुदमन्दिषुः सुताः|	when they brought forward with the lovely curd of kine effused have cheered the hero to bestow his gifts.
अछा हि सोमः कलशानसिष्यददत्यो न वोळ्हा रघुवर्तनिर्व्र्षा|	hither hath soma flowed unto the beakers like a chariothorse a stallion swift upon his way.
अथा देवानामुभयस्य जन्मनो विद्वानश्नोत्यमुत इतश्च यत|	thus knowing both the generations he obtains the rights and dues of gods from yonder and from hence.
आ नः सोम पवमानः किरा वस्विन्दो भव मघवा राधसो महः|	while thou art cleansed o soma scatter wealth on us indu bestow great bounty as a liberal prince.
शिक्षा वयोधो वसवे सु चेतुना मा नो गयमारे अस्मत परा सिचः|	giver of life with wisdom help to opulence strew not our home possessions far away from us.
आ नः पूषा पवमानः सुरातयो मित्रो गछन्तु वरुणः सजोषसः|	hither let pūṣan pavamana come to us varuṇa mitra bountiful of one accord.
बर्हस्पतिर्मरुतो वायुरश्विना तवष्टा सविता सुयमा सरस्वती|	the maruts aśvins vāyu and bṛhaspati savitar tvaṣṭar tractable sarasvatī.
उभे दयावाप्र्थिवी विश्वमिन्वे अर्यमा देवो अदितिर्विधाता|	both heaven and earth the allinvigorating pair vidhatar aditi and aryaman the god.
भगो नर्शंस उर्वन्तरिक्षं विश्वे देवाः पवमानंजुषन्त|	bhaga who blesses men the spacious firmamentlet all the gods in pavamana take delight.
पर सेनानीः शूरो अग्रे रथानां गव्यन्नेति हर्षते अस्य सेना|	in forefront of the cars forth goes the hero the leader winning spoil his host rejoices.
भद्रान कर्ण्वन्निन्द्रहवान सखिभ्य आ सोमो वस्त्रा रभसानि दत्ते|	soma endues his robes of lasting colours and blesses for his friends their calls on indra.
समस्य हरिं हरयो मर्जन्त्यश्वहयैरनिशितं नमोभिः|	men decked with gold adorn his golden tendril incessantly with steedimpelling homage.
आ तिष्ठति रथमिन्द्रस्य सखा विद्वानेना सुमतिं यात्यछ|	the friend of indra mounts his car wellknowing he comes thereon to meet the prayer we offer.
स नो देव देवताते पवस्व महे सोम पसरस इन्द्रपानः|	o god for service of the gods flow onward for food sublime as indras drink o soma.
कर्ण्वन्नपो वर्षयन दयामुतेमामुरोरा नो वरिवस्या पुनानः|	making the floods bedewing earth and heaven come from the vast comfort us while we cleanse thee.
अजीतयेअहतये पवस्व सवस्तये सर्वतातये बर्हते|	flow for prosperity and constant vigour flow on for happiness and high perfection.
तदुशन्ति विश्व इमे सखायस्तदहं वश्मि पवमान सोम|	this is the wish of these friends assembled this is my wish o soma pavamana.
सोमः पवते जनिता मतीनां जनिता दिवो जनिता पर्थिव्याः|	father of holy hymns soma flows onward the father of the earth father of heaven.
जनिताग्नेर्जनिता सूर्यस्य जनितेन्द्रस्य जनितोत विष्णोः|	father of agni sūryas generator the father who begat indra and viṣṇu.
बरह्मा देवानां पदवीः कवीनां रषिर्विप्राणां महिषोम्र्गाणाम|	brahman of gods the leader of the poets Ṛṣi of sages bull of savage creatures.
शयेनो गर्ध्राणां सवधितिर्वनानां सोमः पवित्रमत्येति रेभन|	falcon amid the vultures axe of forests over the cleansing sieve goes soma singing.
परावीविपद वाच ऊर्मिं न सिन्धुर्गिरः सोमः पवमानोमनीषाः|	he soma pavamana like a river hath stirred the wave of voice our songs and praises.
अन्तः पश्यन वर्जनेमावराण्या तिष्ठति वर्षभो गोषु जानन|	beholding these inferior powers in cattle he rests among them as a steer wellknowing.
स मत्सरः पर्त्सु वन्वन्नवातः सहस्ररेता अभि वाजमर्ष|	as gladdener warrior never harmed in battle with thousand genial streams pour strength and vigour.
इन्द्रायेन्दो पवमानो मनीष्यंशोरूर्मिमीरय गा इषण्यन|	as thoughtful pavamana urge o indu speeding the kine the plants wave on to indra.
परि परियः कलशे देववात इन्द्राय सोमो रण्यो मदाय|	dear grateful to the gods on to the beaker moves soma sweet to indra to delight him.
सहस्रधारः शतवाज इन्दुर्वाजी न सप्तिः समना जिगाति|	with hundred powers with thousand currents indu like a strong carhorse goes to the assembly.
स पूर्व्यो वसुविज्जायमानो मर्जानो अप्सु दुदुहानो अद्रौ|	born in old time as finderout of treasures drained with the stone decking himself in waters.
अभिशस्तिपा भुवनस्य राजा विदद गातुं बरह्मणे पूयमानः|	warding off curses king of all existence he shall find way for prayer the while they cleanse him.
तवया हि नः पितरः सोम पूर्वे कर्माणि चक्रुः पवमानधीराः|	for our sage fathers soma pavamana of old performed by thee their sacred duties.
वन्वन्नवातः परिधीन्रपोर्णु वीरेभिरश्वैर्मघवा भवा नः|	fighting unvanquished open the enclosures enrich us with large gifts of steeds and heroes.
यथापवथा मनवे वयोधा अमित्रहा वरिवोविद धविष्मान|	as thou didst flow for manu lifebestowing foequeller comforter rich in oblations.
एवा पवस्व दरविणं दधान इन्द्रे सं तिष्ठ जनयायुधानि|	even thus flow onward now conferring riches combine with indra and bring forth thy weapons.
पवस्व सोम मधुमान रतावापो वसानो अधि सानो अव्ये|	flow onward soma rich in sweets and holy enrobed in waters on the fleecy summit.
अव दरोणानि घर्तवान्ति सीद मदिन्तमो मत्सर इन्द्रपानः|	settle in vessels that are full of fatness as cheering and most gladdening drink for indra.
वर्ष्टिं दिवः शतधारः पवस्व सहस्रसा वाजयुर्देववीतौ|	pour hundredstreamed winner of thousands mighty at the gods banquet pour the rain of heaven.
सं सिन्धुभिः कलशे वावशानः समुस्रियाभिःप्रतिरन न आयुः|	while thou with rivers roarest in the beaker and blent with milk prolongest our existence.
एष सय सोमो मतिभिः पुनानोअत्यो न वाजी तरतीदरातीः|	purified with our holy hymns this soma oertakes malignities like some strong charger.
पयो न दुग्धमदितेरिषिरमुर्विव गातुः सुयमोन वोळहा|	like fresh milk poured by aditi like passage in ample room or like a docile carhorse.
सवायुधः सोत्र्भिः पूयमानोअभ्यर्ष गुह्यं चारु नाम|	cleansed by the pressers armed with noble weapons stream to us the fair secret name thou bearest.
अभि वाजं सप्तिरिव शरवस्याभि वायुमभि गा देवसोम|	pour booty like a horse for love of glory god soma send us kine and send us vāyu.
शिशुं जज्ञानं हर्यतं मर्जन्ति शुम्भन्ति वह्निं मरुतो गणेन|	they deck him at his birth the lovely infant the maruts with their troop adorn the carhorse.
कविर्गीर्भिः काव्येना कविः सन सोमः पवित्रमत्येति रेभन|	by songs a poet and a sage by wisdom soma joes singing through the cleansing filter.
रषिमना य रषिक्र्त सवर्षाः सहस्रणीथः पदवीः कवीनाम|	lightwinner Ṛṣimindcd Ṛṣimaker hymned in a thousand hymns leader of sages.
तर्तीयं धाम महिषः सिषासन सोमो विराजमनुराजति षटुप|	a steer who strives to gain his third form soma is like virāj resplendent as a singer.
चमूषच्छ्येनः शकुनो विभ्र्त्वा गोविन्दुर्द्रप्स आयुधानिबिभ्रत|	hawk seated in the bowls bird wideextended the banner seeking kine and wielding weapons.
अपामूर्मिं सचमानः समुद्रं तुरीयं धाममहिषो विवक्ति|	following close the sea the wave of waters the great bull tells his fourth form and declares it.
मर्यो न शुभ्रस्तन्वं मर्जानोअत्यो न सर्त्वा सनये धनानाम|	like a fair youth who decorates his body a courser rushing to the gain of riches.
वर्षेव यूथा परि कोशमर्षन कनिक्रदच्चम्वोराविवेश|	a steer to herds so flowing to the pitcher he with a roar hath passed into the beakers.
पवस्वेन्दो पवमानो महोभिः कनिक्रदत परि वाराण्यर्ष|	flow on with might as pavamana indu flow loudly roaring through the fleecy filter.
करीळञ्चम्वोरा विश पूयमान इन्द्रं ते रसो मदिरो ममत्तु|	enter the beakers sporting as they cleanse thee and let thy gladdening juice make indra joyful.
परास्य धारा बर्हतीरस्र्ग्रन्नक्तो गोभिः कलशाना विवेश|	his streams have been effused in all their fulness and he hath entered balmed with milk the goblets.
साम कर्ण्वन सामन्यो विपश्चित करन्दन्नेत्यभि सख्युर्न जामिम|	singing his psalm wellskilled in song a chanter be comes as twere to his friends sister roaring.
अपघ्नन्नेषि पवमान शत्रून परियां न जारो अभिगीत इन्दुः|	chasing our foes thou comest pavamana indu besting as lover to his darling.
सीदन वनेषु शकुनो न पत्वा सोमः पुनानः कलशेषु सत्ता|	as a bird flies and settles in the forest thus soma settles purified in goblets.
आ ते रुचः पवमानस्य सोम योषेव यन्ति सुदुघाः सुधाराः|	with full stream and abundant milk o soma thy beams come like a woman as they cleanse thee.
हरिरानीतः पुरुवारो अप्स्वचिक्रदत कलशे देवयूनाम|	he goldhued rich in boons brought to the waters hath roared within the goblet of the pious.
आ नः पवस्व धारया पवमान रयिं पर्थुम|	pour forth on us abundant wealth o pavamana with thy stream.
यया जयोतिर्विदासि नः|	wherewith thou mayest find us light.
इन्दो समुद्रमीङखय पवस्व विश्वमेजय|	o indu swayer of the sea shaker of all things flow thou on.
रायो धर्ता न ओजसा|	bearer of wealth to us with might.
तवया वीरेण वीरवोअभि षयाम पर्तन्यतः|	with thee for hero valiant one may we subdue our enemies.
कषरा णो अभि वार्यम|	let what is precious flow to us.
पर वाजमिन्दुरिष्यति सिषासन वाजसा रषिः|	indu arouses strength the sage who strives for victory winning power.
वरता विदान आयुधा|	discovering holy works and means.
तं गीर्भिर्वाचमीङखयं पुनानं वासयामसि|	mover of speech we robe him with our songs as he is purified.
सोमं जनस्य गोपतिम|	soma the guardian of the folk.
विश्वो यस्य वरते जनो दाधार धर्मणस पतेः|	on whose way lord of holy law most richi as he is purified.
पुनानस्य परभूवसोः|	the people all have set their hearts.
तवं सोमासि धारयुर्मन्द्र ओजिष्ठो अध्वरे|	thou soma hast a running stream joyous most strong at sacrifice.
पवस्व मंहयद्रयिः|	flow bounteously bestowing wealth.
तवं सुतो नर्मादनो दधन्वान मत्सरिन्तमः|	effused as cheerer of the men flowing best gladdener thou art.
इन्द्राय सूरिरन्धसा|	a prince to indra with thy juice.
तवं सुष्वाणो अद्रिभिरभ्यर्ष कनिक्रदत|	poured forth by pressingstones do thou with loud roar send us in a stream.
दयुमन्तं शुष्ममुत्तमम|	most excellent illustrious might.
इन्दुर्हिन्वानो अर्षति तिरो वाराण्यव्यया|	indu urged forward floweth through the fleecy cloth the tawny one.
हरिर्वाजमचिक्रदत|	with his loud roar hath brought as strength.
इन्दो वयव्यमर्षसि वि शरवांसि वि सौभगा|	indu thou flowest through the fleece bringing felicities and fame.
वि वाजांसोम गोमतः|	and soma spoil and wealth in kine.
आ न इन्दो शतग्विनं रयिं गोमन्तमश्विनम|	hither o indu bring us wealth in steeds and cattle hundredfold.
भरा सोम सहस्रिणम|	bring wealth o soma thousandfold.
पवमानास इन्दवस्तिरः पवित्रमाशवः|	in purifying through the sieve the rapid drops ofsoma juice.
इन्द्रं यामेभिराशत|	come nigh to indra in their course.
ककुहः सोम्यो रस इन्दुरिन्द्राय पूर्व्यः|	for indra floweth excellent indu the noblest soma juice.
आयुः पवत आयवे|	the living for the living one.
हिन्वन्ति सूरमुस्रयः पवमानं मधुश्चुतम|	the glittering maids send sūra forth they with their song have sung aloud.
अभि गिरा समस्वरन|	to pavamana dropping meath.
अविता नो अजाश्वः पूषा यामनियामनि|	may pūṣan drawn by goats be our protector and on all his paths.
आ भक्षत कन्यासु नः|	bestow on us our share of maids.
अयं सोमः कपर्दिने घर्तं न पवते मधु|	this soma flows like gladdening oil for him who wears the braided locks.
आ भक्षत कन्यासु नः|	he shall give us our share of maids.
अयं त आघ्र्णे सुतो घर्तं न पवते शुचि|	this soma juice o glowing god flows like pure oil effused for thee.
आ भक्षत कन्यासु नः|	he shall give us our share of maids.
वाचो जन्तुः कवीनां पवस्व सोम धारया|	flow onward soma in thy stream begetter of the sages speech.
देवेषु रत्नधा असि|	wealthgiver among gods art thou.
आ कलशेषु धावति शयेनो वर्म वि गाहते|	the falcon dips within the jars he wrapḥim in his robe and goes.
अभि दरोणा कनिक्रदत|	loud roaring to the vats of wood.
परि पर सोम ते रसोअसर्जि कलशे सुतः|	soma thy juice hath been effused and poured into the pitcher like.
शयेनो न तक्तोर्षति|	a rapid hawk it rushes on.
पवस्व सोम मन्दयन्निन्द्राय मधुमत्तमः|	for indra flow most rich in sweets o soma bringing him delight.
अस्र्ग्रन देववीतये वाजयन्तो रथा इव|	they were sent forth to feast the gods like chariots that display their strength.
ते सुतासो मदिन्तमाः शुक्रा वायुमस्र्क्षत|	brilliant best givers of delight these juices have sent vāyu forth.
गराव्णा तुन्नो अभिष्टुतः पवित्रं सोम गछसि|	bruised by the pressstones and extolled soma thou goest to the sieve.
दधत सतोत्रे सुवीर्यम|	giving the worshipper hero strength.
एष तुन्नो अभिष्टुतः पवित्रमति गाहते|	this juice bruised by the pressingstones and lauded passes through the sieve.
रक्षोहा वारमव्ययम|	slayer of demons through the fleece.
यदन्ति यच्च दूरके भयं विन्दति मामिह|	o pavamana drive away the danger whether near at hand.
पवमानवि तज्जहि|	or far remote that finds me here.
पवमानः सो अद्य नः पवित्रेण विचर्षणिः|	this day may pavamana cleanse us with his purifying power.
यः पोतास पुनातु नः|	most active purifying priest.
यत ते पवित्रमर्चिष्यग्ने विततमन्तरा|	o agni with the cleansing light diffused through all thy fiery glow.
बरह्म तेन पुनीहि नः|	purify thou this prayer of ours.
यत ते पवित्रमर्चिवदग्ने तेन पुनीहि नः|	cleanse us with thine own cleansing power o agni that is bright with flame.
बरह्मसवैः पुनीहि नः|	and by libations poured to thee.
उभाभ्यां देव सवितः पवित्रेण सवेन च|	savitar god by both of these libation purifying power.
मां पुनीहि विश्वतः|	purify me on every side.
तरिभिष टवं देव सवितर्वर्षिष्ठैः सोम धामभिः|	cleanse us god savitar with three o soma with sublimest forms.
अग्ने दक्षैः पुनीहि नः|	agni with forms of power and might.
पुनन्तु मां देवजनाः पुनन्तु वसवो धिया|	may the gods company make me clean and vasus make rue pure by song.
विश्वे देवाः पुनीत मा जातवेदः पुनीहि मा|	purify me ye general gods o jātavedas make me pure.
पर पयायस्व पर सयन्दस्व सोम विश्वेभिरंशुभिः|	fill thyself full of juice flow forth o soma thou with all thy stalks.
देवेभ्य उत्तमं हविः|	the best oblation to the gods.
उप परियं पनिप्नतं युवानमाहुतीव्र्धम|	we with our homage have approached the friend who seeks our wondering praise.
अगन्म बिभ्रतोनमः|	young strengthener of the solemn rite.
अलाय्यस्य परशुर्ननाश तमा पवस्व देव सोम|	lost is alayyas axe o soma god do thou send it back hither in thy flow.
आखुं चिदेव देव सोम|	even soma god if twere a mole.
यः पावमानीरध्येत्य रषिभिः सम्भ्र्तं रसम|	the man who reads the essence stored by saints the pavamani hymns.
सर्वंस पूतमश्नाति सवदितं मातरिश्वना|	tastes food completely purified made sweet by mātariśvans touch.
पावमानीर्यो अध्येत्य रषिभिः सम्भ्र्तं रसम|	whoever reads the essence stored by saints the pavamani hymns.
तस्मै सरस्वती दुहे कषीरं सर्पिर्मधूदकम|	sarasvatī draws forth for him water and butter milk and meath.
स पवस्व मदाय कं नर्चक्षा देववीतये|	flow thou who viewest men to give delight to entertain the gods.
इन्दविन्द्रायपीतये|	indu to indra for his drink.
स नो अर्षाभि दूत्यं तवमिन्द्राय तोशसे|	stream to thine embassy for us thou hastenest for indra to.
देवान सखिभ्य आ वरम|	the gods o better than our friends.
उत तवामरुणं वयं गोभिरञ्ज्मो मदाय कम|	we balm thee red of hue with milk to fit thee for the rapturous joy.
वि नो राये दुरो वर्धि|	unbar for us the doors of wealth.
अत्यू पवित्रमक्रमीद वाजी धुरं न यामनि|	he through the sieve hath passed as comes a courser to the pole to run.
इन्दुर्देवेषु पत्यते|	indu belongs unto the gods.
समी सखायो अस्वरन वने करीळन्तमत्यविम|	all friends have lauded him as he sports in the wood beyond the fleece.
इन्दुं नावा अनूषत|	singers have chanted indus praise.
तया पवस्व धारया यया पीतो विचक्षसे|	flow indu with that stream wherein steeped thou announcest to the man.
इन्दो सतोत्रे सुवीर्यम|	who worships thee heroic strength.
पवस्व देववीरति पवित्रं सोम रंह्या|	soma flow on inviting gods speed to the purifying cloth.
इन्द्रमिन्दो वर्षा विश|	pass into indra as a bull.
आ वच्यस्व महि पसरो वर्षेन्दो दयुम्नवत्तमः|	as mighty food speed hitherward indu as a most splendid steer.
आ योनिं धर्णसिः सदः|	sit in thy place as one with strength.
अधुक्षत परियं मधु धारा सुतस्य वेधसः|	the wellloved meath was made to flow the stream of the creative juice.
अपो वसिष्ट सुक्रतुः|	ne sage drew waters to himself.
महान्तं तवा महीरन्वापो अर्षन्ति सिन्धवः|	the mighty waters yea the floods accompany thee mighty one.
यद गोभिर्वासयिष्यसे|	when thou wilt clothe thee with the milk.
समुद्रो अप्सु माम्र्जे विष्टम्भो धरुणो दिवः|	the lake is brightened in the floods soma our friend heavens prop and stay.
सोमः पवित्रे अस्मयुः|	falls on the purifying cloth.
अचिक्रदद वर्षा हरिर्महान मित्रो न दर्शतः|	the tawny bull hath bellowed fair as mighty mitra to behold.
सं सूर्येण रोचते|	he shines together with the sun.
गिरस्त इन्द ओजसा मर्म्र्ज्यन्ते अपस्युवः|	songs indu active in their might are beautified for thee wherewith.
याभिर्मदाय शुम्भसे|	thou deckest thee for our delight.
तं तवा मदाय घर्ष्वय उ लोकक्र्त्नुमीमहे|	to thee who givest ample room we pray to win the joyous draught.
तव परशस्तयो महीः|	great are the praiseamp due to thee.
अस्मभ्यमिन्दविन्द्रयुर्मध्वः पवस्व धारया|	indu as indras friend on us pour with a stream of sweetness like.
पर्जन्यो वर्ष्टिमानिव|	parjanya sender of the rain.
गोषा इन्दो नर्षा अस्यश्वसा वाजसा उत|	winner of kine indu art thou winner of heroes steeds and strength.
आत्मा यज्ञस्य पूर्व्यः|	primeval soul of sacrifice.
साकमुक्षो मर्जयन्त सवसारो दश धीरस्य धीतयो धनुत्रीः|	ten sisters pouring out the rain together swiftmoving thinkers of the sage adorn him.
हरिः पर्यद्रवज्जाः सूर्यस्य दरोणं ननक्षे अत्यो न वाजी|	hither hath run the goldhued child of sūrya and reached the vat like a fleet vigorous courser.
सं मात्र्भिर्न शिशुर्वावशानो वर्षा दधन्वे पुरुवारोद्भिः|	even as a youngling crying to his mothers the bounteous steer hath flowed along to waters.
मर्यो न योषामभि निष्क्र्तं यन सं गछते कलश उस्रियाभिः|	as youth to damsel so with milk he hastens on to the chose meetingplace the beaker.
उत पर पिप्य ऊधरघ्न्याया इन्दुर्धाराभिः सचते सुमेधाः|	yea swollen is the udder of the milchcow thither in streams goes very sapient indu.
मूर्धानं गावः पयसा चमूष्वभि शरीणन्ति वसुभिर्न निक्तैः|	the kine make ready as with newwashed treasures the head and chief with milk within the vessels.
स नो देवेभिः पवमान रदेन्दो रयिमश्विनं वावशानः|	with all the gods o indu pavamana while thou art roaring send us wealth in horses.
रथिरायतामुशती पुरन्धिरस्मद्र्यगा दावने वसूनाम|	hither upon her car come willing plenty inclined to us to give us of her treasures.
नू नो रयिमुप मास्व नर्वन्तं पुनानो वाताप्यं विश्वश्चन्द्रम|	now unto us mete riches while they cleansethee allglorious swelling wealth with store of heroes.
पर वन्दितुरिन्दो तार्यायुः परातर्मक्षू धियावसुर्जगम्यात|	long be his life who worships thee o indu may he enriched with prayer come soon and early.
पर निम्नेनेव सिन्धवो घनन्तो वर्त्राणि भूर्णयः|	like rivers down a steep descent slaying the vṛtras full of zeal.
सोमा अस्र्ग्रमाशवः|	the rapid somastreams have flowed.
अभि सुवानास इन्दवो वर्ष्टयः पर्थिवीमिव|	the drops of soma juice effused fall like the rain upon the earth.
इन्द्रं सोमासो अक्षरन|	to indra flow the somastreams.
अत्यूर्मिर्मत्सरो मदः सोमः पवित्रे अर्षति|	with swelling wave the gladdening drink the soma flows intoṭhe sieve.
विघ्नन रक्षांसि देवयुः|	loving the gods and slaying fiends.
आ कलशेषु धावति पवित्रे परि षिच्यते|	it hastens to the pitchers poured upon the sieve it waxes strong.
उक्थैर्यज्ञेषुवर्धते|	at sacrifices through the lauds.
अति तरी सोम रोचना रोहन न भराजसे दिवम|	soma thou shinest mounting heaven as twere above lights triple realm.
इष्णन सूर्यं न चोदयः|	and moving secmst to speed the sun.
अभि विप्रा अनूषत मूर्धन यज्ञस्य कारवः|	to him the head of sacnfice singers and bards have sung their songs.
दधानाश्चक्षसि परियम|	offering what he loves to see.
तमु तवा वाजिनं नरो धीभिर्विप्रा अवस्यवः|	the men the sages with their hymns eager for help deck thee strong ampteed.
मर्जन्तिदेवतातये|	deck thee for service of the gods.
मधोर्धारामनु कषर तीव्रः सधस्थमासदः|	flow onward to the stream of meath rest efficacious in thy home.
चारुरताय पीतये|	fair to be drunk at sacrifice.
एष धिया यात्यण्व्य शूरो रथेभिराशुभिः|	through the fine fingers with the song this hero comes with rapid ears.
गछन्निन्द्रस्य निष्क्र्तम|	going to indras special place.
एष पुरू धियायते बर्हते देवतातये|	in holy thought he ponders much for the great worship of the gods.
यत्राम्र्तास आसते|	where the immortals have their seat.
एष हितो वि नीयतेअन्तः शुभ्रावता पथा|	like a good horse is he led out when on the path that shines with light.
यदी तुञ्जन्ति भूर्णयः|	the mettled steeds exert their strength.
एष शर्ङगाणि दोधुवच्छिशीते यूथ्यो वर्षा|	he brandishes his horns on high and whets them bull who leads the herd.
नर्म्णा दधान ओजसा|	doing with might heroic deeds.
एष रुक्मिभिरीयते वाजि शुभ्रेभिरंशुभिः|	he moves a vigorous steed adorned with beauteous rays of shining gold.
पतिः सिन्धूनां भवन|	becoming sovran of the streams.
एष वसूनि पिब्दना परुषा ययिवानति|	he over places rough to pass bringing rich treasures closely packed.
अव शादेषु गछति|	descends into the reservoirs.
एतं मर्जन्ति मर्ज्यमुप दरोणेष्वायवः|	men beautify him in the vats him worthy to be beautified.
परचक्राणं महीरिषः|	him who brings forth abundant food.
एतमु तयं दश कषिपो मर्जन्ति सप्त धीतयः|	him even him the fingers ten and the seven songs make beautiful.
सवायुधं मदिन्तमम|	wellweaponed best of gladdeners.
अस्य परत्नामनु दयुतं शुक्रं दुदुह्रे अह्रयः|	after his ancient splendour they the bold have drawn the bright milk from.
पयः सहस्रसां रषिम|	the sage who wins a thousand gifts.
अयं सूर्य इवोपद्र्गयं सरांसि धावति|	in aspect he is like the sun he runneth forward to the lakes.
सप्त परवता दिवम|	seven currents flowing through the sky.
अयं विश्वानि तिष्ठति पुनानो भुवनोपरि|	he shining in his splendour stands high over all things that exist.
सोमो देवो नसूर्यः|	soma a god as sūrya is.
परि णो देववीतये वाजानर्षसि गोमतः|	thou indu in thy brilliancy pourest on us as indras friend.
पुनान इन्दविन्द्रयुः|	wealth from the kine to feast the gods.
अस्य परेषा हेमना पूयमानो देवो देवेभिः समप्र्क्त रसम|	made pure by this mans urgent zeal and impulse the god hath to the gods his juice imparted.
सुतः पवित्रं पर्येति रेभन मितेव सद्म पशुमान्ति होता|	he goes effused and singing to the filter like priest to measured seats supplied with cattle.
भद्रा वस्त्रा समन्या वसानो महान कविर्निवचनानि शंसन|	robed in fair raiment meet to wear in battle a mighty sage pronouncing invocations.
आ वच्यस्व चम्वोः पूयमानो विचक्षणो जाग्र्विर्देववीतौ|	roll onward to the beakers as they cleanse thee farseeing at the feast of gods and watchful.
समु परियो मर्ज्यते सानो अव्ये यशस्तरो यशसां कषैतो अस्मे|	dear he is brightened on the fleecy summit a prince among us nobler than the noble.
अभि सवर धन्वा पूयमानो यूयं पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	roar out as thou art purified run forward do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
पर गायताभ्यर्चाम देवान सोमं हिनोत महते धनाय|	let us sing praises to the gods sing loudly send ye the soma forth for mighty riches.
सवादुः पवाते अति वारमव्यमा सीदाति कलशं देवयुर्नः|	let him flow sweetlyflavoured through the filter and let our pious one rest in the pitcher.
इन्दुर्देवानामुप सख्यमायन सहस्रधारः पवते मदाय|	winning the friendship of the deities indu flows in a thousand streams to make them joyful.
नर्भिः सतवानो अनु धाम पूर्वमगन्निन्द्रं महते सौभगाय|	praised by the men after the ancient statute he hath come nigh for our great bliss to indra.
सतोत्रे राये हरिरर्षा पुनान इन्द्रं मदो गछतु ते भराय|	flow goldhued cleansing thee to enrich the singer let thy juice go to indra to support him.
देवैर्याहि सरथं राधो अछा यूयं पात सवस्तिभिः सदा नः|	come nigh together with the gods for bounty do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
पर काव्यमुशनेव बरुवाणो देवो देवानां जनिमा विवक्ति|	the god declares the deities generations like uśanā proclaiming lofty wisdom.
महिव्रतः शुचिबन्धुः पावकः पदा वराहो अभ्येति रेभन|	with brilliant kin farruling sanctifying the boar advances singing to the places.
पर हंसासस्त्र्पलं मन्युमछामादस्तं वर्षगणा अयासुः|	the swans the vrsaganas from anear us have brought their restless spirit to our dwelling.
आङगूष्यं पवमानं सखायो दुर्मर्षं साकं परवदन्ति वाणम|	friends come to pavamana meet for praises and sound in concert their resistless music.
स रंहत उरुगायस्य जूतिं वर्था करीळन्तं मिमते न गावः|	he follows the widestriders rapid movement cows low as twere to him who sports at pleasure.
परीणसं कर्णुते तिग्मश्र्ङगो दिवा हरिर्दद्र्शे नक्तं रज्रः|	he with the sharpened horns brings forth abundance the silvery shines by night by day the golden.
इन्दुर्वाजी पवते गोन्योघा इन्द्रे सोमः सह इन्वन मदाय|	strong indu bathed in milk flows on for indra soma exciting strength to make him joyful.
हन्ति रक्षो बाधते पर्यरातीर्वरिवः कर्ण्वन वर्जनस्य राजा|	he quells malignities and slays the demons the king of mighty power who brings us comfort.
अध धारया मध्वा पर्चानस्तिरो रोम पवते अद्रिदुग्धः|	then in a stream he flows milked out with pressstones mingled with sweetness through the fleecy filter.
इन्दुरिन्द्रस्य सख्यं जुषाणो देवो देवस्य मत्सरो मदाय|	indu rejoicing in the love of indra the god who gladdens for the gods enjoyment.
अभि परियाणि पवते पुनानो देवो देवान सवेन रसेन पर्ञ्चन|	as he is purified he pours out treasures a god bedewing gods with his own juices.
इन्दुर्धर्माण्य रतुथा वसानो दश कषिपो अव्यत सानो अव्ये|	indu hath wearing qualities by seasons on the raised fleece engaged the ten swift fingers.
वर्षा शोणो अभिकनिक्रदद गा नदयन्नेति पर्थिवीमुत दयाम|	the red bull bellowing to the kine advances causing the heavens and earth to roar and tbunder.
इन्द्रस्येव वग्नुरा शर्ण्व आजौ परचेतयन्नर्षति वाचमेमाम|	well is he beard like indras shout in battle letting this voice be known he hastens hither.
रसाय्यः पयसा पिन्वमान ईरयन्नेषि मधुमन्तमंशुम|	swelling with milk abounding in sweet flavours urging the meathrich plant thou goest onward.
पवमानः सन्तनिमेषि कर्ण्वन्निन्द्राय सोम परिषिच्यमानः|	raising a shout thou flowest as they cleanse thee when thou o soma art effused for indra.
एवा पवस्व मदिरो मदायोदग्राभस्य नमयन वधस्नैः|	so flow thou on inspiriting for rapture aiming deatbshafts at him who stays the waters.
परि वर्णं भरमाणो रुशन्तं गव्युर्नो अर्ष परि सोम सिक्तः|	flow to us wearing thy resplendent colour effused and eager for the kine o soma.
जुष्ट्वी न इन्दो सुपथा सुगान्युरौ पवस्व वरिवांसि कर्ण्वन|	pleased with us indu send us as thou flowest good easy paths in ample space and comforts.
घनेव विष्वग दुरितानि विघ्नन्नधि षणुना धन्व सानो अव्ये|	dispelling as twere with a club misfortunes run oer the height run oer the fleecy summit.
वर्ष्टिं नो अर्ष दिव्यां जिगत्नुमिळावतीं शंगयीं जीरदानुम|	pour on us rain celestial quickly streaming refreshing fraught with health and ready bounty.
सतुकेव वीता धन्वा विचिन्वन बन्धून्रिमानवरानिन्दो वायून|	flow indu send these winds thy lower kinsmen setting them free like locks of hair unbraided.
गरन्थिं न वि षय गरथितं पुनान रजुं च गातुं वर्जिनं च सोम|	part like a knotted tangle while they cleanse thee o soma righteous and unrighteous conduct.
अत्यो न करदो हरिरा सर्जानो मर्यो देव धन्व पस्त्यावान|	neigh like a tawny courser who is loosened come like a youth o god a housepossessor.
जुष्टो मदाय देवतात इन्दो परि षणुना धन्व सानो अव्ये|	for the gods service for delight o indu run oer the height run over the fleecy summit.
सहस्रधारः सुरभिरदब्धः परि सरव वाजसातौ नर्षह्ये|	with thousand streams inviolate sweetscented flow on for gain of strength that conquers heroes.
अरश्मानो येअरथा अयुक्ता अत्यासो न सस्र्जानास आजौ|	without a car without a rein to guide them unyoked like coursers started in the contest.
एते शुक्रासो धन्वन्ति सोमा देवासस्तानुप याता पिबध्यै|	these brilliant drops of soma juice run forward do ye o deities come nigh to drink them.
एवा न इन्दो अभि देववीतिं परि सरव नभो अर्णश्चमूषु|	so for our banquet of the gods o indu pour down the rain of heaven into the vessels.
सोमो अस्मभ्यं काम्यं बर्हन्तं रयिं ददातु वीरवन्तमुग्रम|	may soma grant us riches sought with longing mighty exceeding strong with store of heroes.
तक्षद यदी मनसो वेनतो वाग जयेष्ठस्य वा धर्मणि कषोरनीके|	what time the loving spirits word had formed him chief of all food by statute of the highest.
आदीमायन वरमा वावशाना जुष्टं पतिं कलशे गाव इन्दुम|	then loudly lowing came the cows to indu the chosen wellloved master in the beaker.
पर दानुदो दिव्यो दानुपिन्व रतं रताय पवते सुमेधाः|	the sage celestial liberal raining bounties pours as he flows the genuine for the truthful.
धर्मा भुवद वर्जन्यस्य राजा पर रश्मिभिर्दशभिर्भारि भूम|	the king shall be effectual strengths upholder he by the ten bright reins is mostly guided.
पवित्रेभिः पवमानो नर्चक्षा राजा देवानामुत मर्त्यानाम|	he who beholds mankind made pure with filters the king supreme of deities and mortals.
दविता भुवद रयिपती रयीणां रतं भरत सुभ्र्तं चार्विन्दुः|	from days of old is treasurelord of riches he indu cherishes fair wellkept order.
अर्वानिव शरवसे सातिमछेन्द्रस्य वायोरभि वीतिमर्ष|	haste like a steed to vittory for glory to indras and to vāyus entertainment.
स नः सहस्रा बर्हतीरिषो दा भवा सोम दरविणोवित पुनानः|	give us food ample thousandfold be soma the finderout of riches when they cleanse thee.
देवाव्यो नः परिषिच्यमानाः कषयं सुवीरं धन्वन्तु सोमाः|	effused by us let goddelighting somas bring as they flow a home with noble heroes.
आयज्यवः सुमतिं विश्ववारा होतारो न दिवियजो मन्द्रतमाः|	rich in all boons like priests acquiring favour the worshippers of heaven the best of cheerers.
एवा देव देवताते पवस्व महे सोम पसरसे देवपानः|	so god for service of the gods flow onward flow drink of gods for ample food o soma.
महश्चिद धि षमसि हिताः समर्ये कर्धि सुष्ठाने रोदसी पुनानः|	for we go forth to war against the mighty make heaven and earth well stablished by thy cleansing.
अश्वो नो करदो वर्षभिर्युजानः सिंहो न भीमो मनसो जवीयान|	thou yoked by strong men neighest like a courser swifter than thought is like an awful lion.
अर्वाचीनैः पथिभिर्ये रजिष्ठा आ पवस्व सौमनसं न इन्दो|	by paths directed hitherward the straightest send thou us happiness indu while they cleanse thee.
शतं धारा देवजाता अस्र्ग्रन सहस्रमेनाः कवयो मर्जन्ति|	sprung from the gods a hundred streams a thousand have been effused sages prepare and purge them.
इन्दो सनित्रं दिव आ पवस्व पुरेतासि महतो धनस्य|	bring us from heaven the means of winnning indu thou artforerunnner of abundant riches.
दिवो न सर्गा असस्र्ग्रमह्नां राजा न मित्रं पर मिनातिधीरः|	the streams of days were poured as twere from heaven the wise king doth not treat his friend unkindly.
पितुर्न पुत्रः करतुभिर्यतान आ पवस्व विशेस्या अजीतिम|	like a son following his fathers wishes grant to this family success and safety.
पर ते धारा मधुमतीरस्र्ग्रन वारान यत पूतो अत्येष्यव्यान|	now are thy streams poured forth with all their sweetness when purified thou goest through the filter.
पवमान पवसे धाम गोनां जज्ञानः सूर्यमपिन्वो अर्कैः|	the race of kine is thy gift pavarridna when born thou madest sūrya rich with brightness.
कनिक्रददनु पन्थां रतस्य शुक्रो वि भास्यम्र्तस्य धाम|	bright bellowing aiong the path of order thou shinest as the form of life eternal.
स इन्द्राय पवसे मत्सरवान हिन्वानो वाचं मतिभिः कवीनाम|	thou flowest on as gladdening drink for indra sending thy voice out with the hymns of sages.
दिव्यः सुपर्णोअव चक्षि सोम पिन्वन धाराः कर्मणा देववीतौ|	pouring out streams at the gods feast with service thou soma lookest down a heavenly eagle.
एन्दो विश कलशं सोमधानं करन्दन्निहि सूर्यस्योप रश्मिम|	enter the somaholding beaker indu and with a roar approach the ray of sarya.
तिस्रो वाच ईरयति पर वह्निरतस्य धीतिं बरह्मणो मनीषाम|	three are the voices that the courser utters he speaks the thought of prayer the law of order.
गावो यन्ति गोपतिं पर्छमानाः सोमं यन्ति मतयो वावशानाः|	to the cows master come the cows inquiring the hymns with eager longing come to soma.
सोमं गावो धेनवो वावशानाः सोमं विप्रा मतिभिः पर्छमानाः|	to soma come the cows the milchkine longing to soma sages with their hvmns inquiring.
सोमः सुतः पूयते अज्यमानः सोमे अर्कास्त्रिष्टुभिः सं नवन्ते|	soma effused is purified and blended our hymns and tṛṣṭup songs unite in soma.
एवा नः सोम परिषिच्यमान आ पवस्व पूयमानः सवस्ति|	thus soma as we pour thee into vessels while thou art purified flow for our welfare.
इन्द्रमा विश बर्हता रवेण वर्धया वाचं जनया पुरन्धिम|	pass into indra with a mighty roaring make the voice swell and generate abundance.
आ जाग्र्विर्विप्र रता मतीनां सोमः पुनानो असदच्चमूषु|	singer of true songs everwatchful soma hath settled in the ladles when they cleanse him.
सपन्ति यं मिथुनासो निकामा अध्वर्यवो रथिरासः सुहस्ताः|	him the adhvaryus paired and eager follow leaders of sacrifice and skilfulhanded.
स पुनान उप सूरे न धातोभे अप्रा रोदसी वि ष आवः|	cleansed near the sun as twere he as creator hath filled full heaven and earth and hath disclosed them.
परिया चिद यस्य परियसास ऊती स तू धनं कारिणेन पर यंसत|	he by whose dear help men gain all their wishes shall yield the precious meed as to a victor.
स वर्धिता वर्धनः पूयमानः सोमो मीढ्वानभि नो जयोतिषावीत|	he being cleansed the strengthener and increaser soma the bounteous helped us with his lustre.
येना नः पूर्वे पितरः पदज्ञाः सवर्विदो अभि गा अद्रिमुष्णन|	wherewith our sires of old who knew the footsteps found light and stole the cattle from the mountain.
अक्रान समुद्रः परथमे विधर्मञ जनयन परजा भुवनस्यराजा|	in the first vault of heaven loud roared the ocean king of all being generating creatures.
वर्षा पवित्रे अधि सानो अव्ये बर्हत सोमो वाव्र्धे सुवान इन्दुः|	steer in the filter on the fleecy summit soma the drop effused hath waxen mighty.
महत तत सोमो महिषश्चकारापां यद गर्भोअव्र्णीत देवान|	soma the steer in that as child of waters he chose the gods performed that great achievement.
अदधादिन्द्रे पवमान ओजोअजनयत सूर्ये जयोतिरिन्दुः|	he pavamana granted strength to indra he indu generated light in sūrya.
मत्सि वायुमिष्टये राधसे च मत्सि मित्रावरुणा पूयमानः|	make vāyu glad for furtherance and bounty cheer varuṇa and mitra as they cleanse thee.
मत्सि शर्धो मारुतं मत्सि देवान मत्सि दयावाप्र्थिवी देव सोम|	gladden the gods gladden the host of maruts make heaven and earth rejoice o god o soma.
रजुः पवस्व वर्जिनस्य हन्तापामीवां बाधमानो मर्धश्च|	flow onward righteous slayer of the wicked driving away our enemies and sickness.
अभिश्रीणन पयः पयसाभि गोनामिन्द्रस्य तवं तव वयं सखायः|	blending thy milk with milk which cows afford us we are thy friends thou art the friend of indra.
मध्वः सूदं पवस्व वस्व उत्सं वीरं च न आ पवस्वा भगं च|	pour us a fount of meath a spring of treasure send us a hero son and happy fortune.
सवदस्वेन्द्राय पवमान इन्दो रयिं च न आ पवस्वा समुद्रात|	be sweet to india when they cleanse thee indu and pour down riches on us from the ocean.
सोमः सुतो धारयात्यो न हित्वा सिन्धुर्न निम्नमभि वाज्यक्षाः|	strong soma pressed like an impetuous courser hath flowed in stream as a flood speeding downward.
आ योनिं वन्यमसदत पुनानः समिन्दुर्गोभिरसरत समद्भिः|	cleansed he hath settled in his wooden dwelling indu hath flowed with milk and with the waters.
एष सय ते पवत इन्द्र सोमश्चमूषु धीर उशते तवस्वान|	strong wise for thee who longest for his coming this soma here flows to the bowls o indra.
सवर्चक्षा रथिरः सत्यशुष्मः कामो न यो देवयतामसर्जि|	he chariotborne sunbright and truly potent was poured forth like the longing of the pious.
एष परत्नेन वयसा पुनानस्तिरो वर्पांसि दुहितुर्दधानः|	he purified with ancient vital vigour pervading all his daughters forms and figures.
वसानः शर्म तरिवरूथमप्सु होतेव याति समनेषुरेभन|	finding his threefold refuge in the waters goes singing as a priest to the assemblies.
नू नस्त्वं रथिरो देव सोम परि सरव चम्वोः पूयमानः|	now chariotborne flow unto us god soma as thou art purified flow to the saucers.
अप्सु सवादिष्ठो मधुमान रतावा देवो न यः सविता सत्यमन्मा|	sweetest in waters rich in meath and holy as savitar the god is truthfulminded.
अभि वायुं वीत्यर्षा गर्णानोअभि मित्रावरुणा पूयमानः|	to feast him flow mid song and hymn to vāyu flow purified to varuṇa and mitra.
अभी नरं धीजवनं रथेष्ठामभीन्द्रं वर्षणं वज्रबाहुम|	flow to the songinspiring carborne hero to mighty indra him who wields the thunder.
अभि वस्त्रा सुवसनान्यर्षाभि धेनूः सुदुघाः पूयमानः|	pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly send purified miichkine abundant yielders.
अभि चन्द्रा भर्तवे नो हिरण्याभ्यश्वान रथिनो देव सोम|	god soma send us chariotdrawing horses that they may bring us treasures bright and golden.
अभी नो अर्ष दिव्या वसून्यभि विश्वा पार्थिवा पूयमानः|	send to us in a stream celestial riches send us when thou art cleansed what earth containeth.
अभि येन दरविणमश्नवामाभ्यर्षेयं जमदग्निवन्नः|	so that thereby we may acquire possessions and rsihood in jamadagnis manner.
अया पवा पवस्वैना वसूनि मांश्चत्व इन्दो सरसि पर धन्व|	pour forth this wealth with this purification flow onward to the yellow lake o indu.
बरध्नश्चिदत्र वातो न जातः पुरुमेधश्चित तकवे नरं दात|	here too the ruddy windswift full of wisdom shall give a son to him who cometh quickly.
उत न एना पवया पवस्वाधि शरुते शरवाय्यस्य तीर्थे|	flow on for us with this purification to the famed ford of thee whose due is glory.
षष्टिं सहस्रा नैगुतो वसूनि वर्क्षं न पक्वं धूनवद रणाय|	may the foequeller shake us down for triumph like a trees ripe fruit sixty thousand treasures.
महीमे अस्य वर्षनाम शूषे मांश्चत्वे वा पर्शने वा वधत्रे|	eagerly do we pray for those two exploits at the blue lake and prsana wrought in battle.
अस्वापयन निगुतः सनेहयच्चापामित्रानपाचितो अचेतः|	he sent our enemies to sleep and slew thern and turned away the foolish and unfriendly.
सं तरी पवित्रा विततान्येष्यन्वेकं धावसि पूयमानः|	thou comest unto three extended filters and hasteriest through each one as they cleanse thee.
असि भगो असि दात्रस्य दातासि मघवा मघवद्भ्य इन्दो|	thou art the giver of the gift a bhaga a maghavan for liberal lords o indu.
एष विश्ववित पवते मनीषी सोमो विश्वस्य भुवनस्य राजा|	this soma here the wise the allobtainer flows on his way as king of all existence.
दरप्सानीरयन विदथेष्विन्दुर्वि वारमव्यं समयाति याति|	driving the drops at our assemblies indu completely traverses the fleecy filter.
इन्दुं रिहन्ति महिषा अदब्धाः पदे रेभन्ति कवयो न गर्ध्राः|	the great inviolate are kissing indu and singing in his place like eager sages.
हिन्वन्ति धीरा दशभिः कषिपाभिः समञ्जते रूपमपां रसेन|	the wise men send him forth with ten swift fingers and balm his form with essence of the waters.
तवया वयं पवमानेन सोम भरे कर्तं वि चिनुयाम शश्वत|	soma may we with thee as pavamana pile up together all our spoil in battle.
तन नो मित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पर्थिवीुत दयौः|	this boon vouchsafe us varuṇa and mitra and aditi and sindhu earth and heaven.
पर सुवानो धारया तनेन्दुर्हिन्वानो अर्षति|	the drop of soma juice effused flows onward with this stream impelled.
रुजद दर्ळ्हा वयोजसा|	rending strong places with its might.
सुत इन्द्राय वायवे वरुणाय मरुद्भ्यः|	poured forth to indra varuṇa to vāyu and the marut hosts.
सोमो अर्षति विष्णवे|	to viṣṇu flows the soma juice.
वर्षाणं वर्षभिर्यतं सुन्वन्ति सोममद्रिभिः|	with stones they press the soma forth the strong conducted by the strong.
दुहन्तिशक्मना पयः|	they milk the liquor out with skill.
भुवत तरितस्य मर्ज्यो भुवदिन्द्राय मत्सरः|	tis he whom trita must refine tis he who shall make indra glad.
सं रूपैरज्यते हरिः|	the tawny one is decked with tints.
अभीं रतस्य विष्टपं दुहते पर्श्निमातरः|	him do the sons of pṛśni milk the dwellingplace of sacrifice.
चारु परियतमं हविः|	oblation lovely and most dear.
समेनमह्रुता इमा गिरो अर्षन्ति सस्रुतः|	to him in one unitcd stream thse songs flow on straight forward he.
धेनूर्वाश्रोवीवशत|	loud voiced hath made the milchkine low.
पर ते सोतार ओण्यो रसं मदाय घर्ष्वय|	the pressers from the somapress send forth thy juice for rapturous joy.
सर्गो न तक्त्येतशः|	the speckled sap runs like a flood.
करत्वा दक्षस्य रथ्यमपो वसानमन्धसा|	with strength we follow through the sieve him who brings might and wins the kine.
गोषामण्वेषु सश्चिम|	enrobed in water with his juice.
अनप्तमप्सु दुष्टरं सोमं पवित्र आ सर्ज|	pour on the sieve the soma neer subdued in waters waterless.
पुनीहीन्द्राय पातवे|	and make it pure for indras drink.
पर पुनानस्य चेतसा सोमः पवित्रे अर्षति|	moved by the purifiers thought the soma flows into the sieve.
करत्वा सधस्थमासदत|	by wisdom it hath gained its home.
पर तवा नमोभिरिन्दव इन्द्र सोमा अस्र्क्षत|	with humble homage indra have the somadrops flowed forth to thee.
महे भरायकारिणः|	contending for the glorious prize.
पुनानो रूपे अव्यये विश्वा अर्षन्नभि शरियः|	purified in his fleecy garb attaining every beauty he.
शूरो न गोषु तिष्ठति|	stands herolike amid the kine.
दिवो न सानु पिप्युषी धारा सुतस्य वेधसः|	swelling as twere to heights of heaven the stream of the creative juice.
वर्था पवित्रे अर्षति|	falls lightly on the cleansing sieve.
तवं सोम विपश्चितं तना पुनान आयुषु|	thus soma purifying himwho knoweth song mid living men.
अव्यो वारं वि धावसि|	thou wanderest through the cloth of wool.
पवस्व गोजिदश्वजिद विश्वजित सोम रण्यजित|	flow onward soma winning kine and steeds and all that gives delight.
परजावद रत्नमा भर|	bring hither wealth with progeny.
पवस्वाद्भ्यो अदाभ्यः पवस्वौषधीभ्यः|	flow onward from the waters flow inviolable from the plants.
पवस्व धिषणाभ्यः|	flow onward from the pressingboards.
तवं सोम पवमानो विश्वानि दुरिता तर|	soma as pavamana pass over all trouble and distress.
कविः सीद नि बर्हिषि|	sit on the sacred grass a sage.
पवमान सवर्विदो जायमानोअभवो महान|	thou pavamana foundest light thou at thy birth becamest great.
इन्दो विश्वानभीदसि|	o indu thou art over all.
अभि नो वाजसातमं रयिमर्ष पुरुस्प्र्हम|	stream on us riches that are sought by many best at winning strength.
इन्दो सहस्रभर्णसं तुविद्युम्नं विभ्वासहम|	riches o indu thousandfold glorious conquering the great.
परि षय सुवानो अव्ययं रथे न वर्माव्यत|	effused he hath as on a car invested him in fleecy mail.
इन्दुरभिद्रुणा हितो हियानो धाराभिरक्षाः|	onward hath indu flowed in streams impelled surrounded by the wood.
परि षय सुवानो अक्षा इन्दुरव्ये मदच्युतः|	effused this indu hath flowed on distilling rapture to the fleece.
धारा य ऊर्ध्वो अध्वरे भराजा नैति गव्ययुः|	he goes erect as seeking kine in stream with light to sacrifice.
स हि तवं देव शश्वते वसु मर्ताय दाशुषे|	for thou thyself o indu god to every mortal worshipper.
इन्दो सहस्रिणं रयिं शतात्मानं विवाससि|	attractest riches thousandfold made manifest in hundred forms.
वयं ते अस्य वर्त्रहन वसो वस्वः पुरुस्प्र्हः|	good vṛtraslayer may we be still nearest to this wealth of thine.
नि नेदिष्ठतमा इषः सयाम सुम्नस्याध्रिगो|	which many crave nearest to food and happiness resistless one.
दविर्यं पञ्च सवयशसं सवसारो अद्रिसंहतम|	whom bright with native splendour crushed between the pair of pressingstones.
परियमिन्द्रस्य काम्यं परस्नापयन्त्यूर्मिणम|	the wavy friend whom indra lovesthe twicefive sisters dip and bathe.
परि तयं हर्यतं हरिं बभ्रुं पुनन्ति वारेण|	him with the fleece they purify brown goldenhued beloved of all.
यो देवान विश्वानित परि मदेन सह गछति|	who with exhilarating juice goes forth to all the deities.
अस्य वो हयवसा पान्तो दक्षसाधनम|	through longing for this sap of yours ye drink what brings ability.
यः सूरिषु शरवोब्र्हद दधे सवर्ण हर्यतः|	even him who dear as heavens own light gives to our princes high renown.
स वां यज्ञेषु मानवी इन्दुर्जनिष्ट रोदसी|	indu at holy rites produced you heaven and earth the friends of men.
देवो देवी गिरिष्ठा अस्रेधन तं तुविष्वणि|	hillhaunting god the goddesses they bruised him where the roar was loud.
इन्द्राय सोम पातवे वर्त्रघ्ने परि षिच्यसे|	for vṛtraslaying indra thou soma art poured that he may drink.
नरे च दक्षिणावते देवाय सदनासदे|	poured for the guerdongiving man poured for the god who sitteth there.
ते परत्नासो वयुष्टिषु सोमाः पवित्रे अक्षरन|	these ancient somas at the break of day have flowed into the sieve.
अपप्रोथन्तः सनुतर्हुरश्चितः परातस्तानप्रचेतसः|	snorting away at early morn these foolish evilhearted ones.
तं सखायः पुरोरुचं यूयं वयं च सूरयः|	friends may the princes ye and we obtain this most resplendent one.
अश्याम वाजगन्ध्यं सनेम वाजपस्त्यम|	gain him who hath the smell of strength win him whose home is very strength.
उत ते शुष्मास ईरते सिन्धोरूर्मेरिव सवनः|	loud as a rivers roaring wave thy powers have lifted up themselves.
वाणस्य चोदया पविम|	urge on thine arrows sharpened point.
परसवे त उदीरते तिस्रो वाचो मखस्युवः|	at thine effusion upward rise three voices full of joy when thou.
यदव्य एषिसानवि|	flowest upon the fleecy ridge.
अव्यो वारे परि परियं हरिं हिन्वन्त्यद्रिभिः|	on to the fleece they urge with stone the tawny wellbeloved one.
पवमानम्मधुश्चुतम|	even pavamana dropping meath.
आ पवस्व मदिन्तम पवित्रं धारया कवे|	flow with thy current to the sieve o sage most powerful to cheer.
अर्कस्य योनिमासदम|	to seat thee in the place of song.
स पवस्व मदिन्तम गोभिरञ्जानो अक्तुभिः|	flow most exhilarating flow anointed with the milk for balm.
इन्दविन्द्रायपीतये|	indu for indra for his drink.
एष देवो अमर्त्यः पर्णवीरिव दीयति|	here present this immortal god flies like a bird upon her wings.
अभि दरोणान्यासदम|	to settle in the vats of wood.
एष देवो विपा कर्तोअति हवरांसि धावति|	this god made ready with the hymn runs swiftly through the winding ways.
पवमानो अदाभ्यः|	inviolable as he flows.
एष देवो विपन्युभिः पवमान रतायुभिः|	this god while flowing is adorned like a bay steed for war by men.
हरिर्वाजाय मर्ज्यते|	devout and skilled in holy songs.
एष विश्वानि वार्या शूरो यन्निव सत्वभिः|	he like a warrior going forth with heroes as he flows along.
पवमानःसिषासति|	is fain to win all precious boons.
एष देवो रथर्यति पवमानो दशस्यति|	this god as he is flowing on speeds like a car and gives his gifts.
आविष कर्णोति वग्वनुम|	he lets his voice be heard of all.
एष विप्रैरभिष्टुतोअपो देवो वि गाहते|	praised by the sacred bards this god dives into waters and bestows.
दधद रत्नानिदाशुषे|	rich gifts upon the worshipper.
एष दिवं वि धावति तिरो रजांसि धारया|	away he rushes with his stream across the regions into heaven.
पवमानःकनिक्रदत|	and roars as he is flowing on.
एष दिवं वयासरत तिरो रजाण्स्यस्प्र्तः|	while flowing meet for sacrifice he hath gone up to heaven across.
पवमानः सवध्वरः|	the regions irresistible.
एष परत्नेन जन्मना देवो देवेभ्यः सुतः|	after the way of ancient time this god pressed out for deities.
हरिः पवित्रेर्षति|	flows tawny to the strainingcloth.
एष उ सय पुरुव्रतो जज्ञानो जनयन्निषः|	this lord of many holy laws even at his birth engendering strength.
धारया पवते सुतः|	effused flows onward in a stream.
तं वः सखायो मदाय पुनानमभि गायत|	sing ye aloud o friends to him who makes him pure for gladdening drink.
शिशुं न यज्ञैः सवदयन्त गूर्तिभिः|	they shall make sweet the child with sacrifice and laud.
सं वत्स इव मात्र्भिरिन्दुर्हिन्वानो अज्यते|	like as a calf with mother cows so indu is urged forth and sent.
देवावीर्मदोमतिभिः परिष्क्र्तः|	glorified by our hymns the goddelighting juice.
अयं दक्षाय साधनोअयं शर्धाय वीतये|	effectual means of power is he he is a banquet for the troop.
अयं देवेभ्यो मधुमत्तमः सुतः|	he who hath been effused most rich in meath for gods.
गोमन न इन्दो अश्ववत सुतः सुदक्ष धन्व|	flow to us indu passing strong effused with wealth of kine and steeds.
शुचिं ते वर्णमधि गोषु दीधरम|	i will spread forth above the milk thy radiant hue.
स नो हरीणां पत इन्दो देवप्सरस्तमः|	lord of the tawny indu thou who art the gods most special food.
सखेव सख्ये नर्यो रुचे भव|	as friend to friend for splendour be thou good to men.
सनेमि तवमस्मदानदेवं कं चिदत्रिणम|	drive utterly far away from us each godless each voracious foe.
साह्वानिन्दो परि बाधो अप दवयुम|	o indu overcome and drive the false afar.
परास्य धारा अक्षरन वर्ष्णः सुतस्यौजसा|	forward with mighty force have flowed the currents of this steer effused.
देवाननु परभूषतः|	of him who sets him by the gods.
सप्तिं मर्जन्ति वेधसो गर्णन्तः कारवो गिरा|	the singers praise him with their song and learned priests adorn the steed.
जयोतिर्जज्ञानमुक्थ्यम|	brought forth as light that merits laud.
सुषहा सोम तानि ते पुनानाय परभूवसो|	these things thou winnest lightly while purified soma lord of wealth.
वर्धा समुद्रमुक्थ्यम|	fill full the sea that claims our praise.
विश्वा वसूनि संजयन पवस्व सोम धारया|	winning all precious things at once flow on o soma with thy stream.
इनु दवेषांसि सध्र्यक|	drive to one place our enemies.
रक्षा सु नो अररुषः सवनात समस्य कस्य चित|	preserve us from the godless from illomened voice of one and all.
निदो यत्रमुमुच्महे|	that so we may be freed from blame.
एन्दो पार्थिवं रयिं दिव्यं पवस्व धारया|	o indu as thou flowest on bring us the wealth of earth and heaven.
दयुमन्तं शुष्ममा भर|	and splendid vigour in thy stream.
सोमस्य धारा पवते नर्चक्षस रतेन देवान हवते दिवस परि|	on flows the stream of soma who beholds mankind by everlasting law he calls the gods from heaven.
बर्हस्पते रवथेना वि दिद्युते समुद्रासो न सवनानि विव्यचुः|	he lightens with the roaring of br aspati h the lakes have not contained the pourings of juice.
यं तवा वाजिन्नघ्न्या अभ्यनूषतायोहतं योनिमा रोहसि दयुमान|	thou powerful soma thou to whom the cows have lowed ascendest bright with sheen thine ironfashioned home.
मघोनामायुः परतिरन महि शरव इन्द्राय सोमपवसे वर्षा मदः|	thou lengthening our princes life and high renown flowest for indra as his might to gladdening drink.
एन्द्रस्य कुक्षा पवते मदिन्तम ऊर्जं वसानः शरवसे सुमङगलः|	best giver of delight he flows to indras throat robing himself in might auspicious one for fame.
परत्यं स विश्वा भुवनाभि पप्रथे करीळन हरिरत्यः सयन्दते वर्षा|	he spreads himself abroad to meet all things that be the vigorous tawny steed flows sporting on his way.
तं तवा देवेभ्यो मधुमत्तमं नरः सहस्रधारं दुहते दश कषिपः|	the men the ten swift fingers milk thee out for gods even thee most rich in meath with thousand flowing streams.
नर्भिः सोम परच्युतो गरावभिः सुतो विश्वान्देवाना पवस्वा सहस्रजित|	soma who winnest thousands driven by the men expressed with stones bring as thou flowest all the gods.
तं तवा हस्तिनो मधुमन्तमद्रिभिर्दुहन्त्यप्सु वर्षभन्दश कषिपः|	defthanded men with stones the ten swift fingers drain thee into waters thee the steer enriched with sweets.
इन्द्रं सोम मादयन दैव्यं जनं सिन्धोरिवोर्मिः पवमानो अर्षसि|	thou soma gladdening indra and the heavenly host flowest as pavamana like a rivers wave.
पर पुनानाय वेधसे सोमाय वच उद्यतम|	to soma who is purified as ordering priest the song is raised.
भर्तिं न भरा मतिभिर्जुजोषते|	bring meed as twere to one who makes thee glad with hymns.
परि वाराण्यव्यया गोभिरञ्जानो अर्षति|	blended with milk and curds he flows on through the long wool of the sheep.
तरी षधस्था पुनानः कर्णुते हरिः|	the goldhued purified makes him three seats for rest.
परि कोशं मधुश्चुतमव्यये वारे अर्षति|	on through the long wool of the sheep to the meathdropping vat he flows.
अभि वाणीरषीणां सप्त नूषत|	the Ṛṣis sevenfold quire hath sung aloud to him.
परि णेता मतीनां विश्वदेवो अदाभ्यः|	shared by all gods infallible the leader of our holy hymns.
सोमः पुनानश्चम्वोर्विशद धरिः|	goldenhued soma being cleansed hath reached the bowls.
परि दैवीरनु सवधा इन्द्रेण याहि सरथम|	after thy godlike qualities associate with indra go.
पुनानो वाघद वाघद्भिरमर्त्यः|	as a priest purified by priests immortal one.
परि सप्तिर्न वाजयुर्देवो देवेभ्यः सुतः|	like a carhorse who shows his strength a god effused for deities.
वयानशिः पवमानो वि धावति|	the penetrating pavamana flows along.
पवस्व वर्ष्टिमा सु नोअपामूर्मिं दिवस परि|	poust down the rain upon us pour a wave of waters from the sky.
अयक्ष्मा बर्हतीरिषः|	and plenteous store of wholesome fbod.
तया पवस्व धारया यया गाव इहागमन|	flow onward with that stream of thine whereby the cows have come to us.
जन्यास उप नो गर्हम|	the kine of strangers to our home.
घर्तं पवस्व धारया यज्ञेषु देववीतमः|	chief friend of gods in sacred rites pour on us fatness with thy stream.
अस्मभ्यं वर्ष्टिमा पव|	ppur down on us a flood of rain.
स न ऊर्जे वयव्ययं पवित्रं धाव धारया|	to give us vigour with thy stream run through the fleecy strainingcloth.
देवासः शर्णवन हि कम|	for verily the gods will bear.
पवमानो असिष्यदद रक्षांस्यपजङघनत|	onward hath pavamana flowed and beaten off the rākṣasas.
परत्नवद रोचयन रुचः|	flashing out splendour as of old.
तरत स मन्दी धावति धारा सुतस्यान्धसः|	swift runs this giver of delight even the stream of flowing juice.
तरत स मन्दी धावति|	swift runs this giver of delight.
उस्रा वेद वसूनां मर्तस्य देव्यवसः|	the morning knows all precious things the goddess knows her grace to man.
तरत स मन्दी धावति|	swift runs this giver of delight.
धवस्रयोः पुरुषन्त्योरा सहस्राणि दद्महे|	we have accepted thousands from dhvasras and puruṣantis hands.
तरत स मन्दी धावति|	swift runs this giver of delight.
आ ययोस्त्रिंशतं तना सहस्राणि च दद्महे|	from whom we have accepted thus thousands and three times ten beside.
तरत समन्दी धावति|	swift runs this giver of delight.
तम उ नूनं तविषीमन्तम एषां सतुषे गणम मारुतं नव्यसीनाम|	now do i glorify their mighty cohort the company of these the youthful maruts.
य आश्वश्वा अमवद वहन्त उतेशिरे अम्र्तस्य सवराजः|	who ride impetuous on with rapid horses and radiant in themselves are lords of amṛta.
तवेषं गणं तवसं खादिहस्तं धुनिव्रतम मायिनं दातिवारम|	the mighty glittering band armbound with bracelets givers of bliss unmeasured in their greatness.
मयोभुवो ये अमिता महित्वा वन्दस्व विप्र तुविराधसो नॄन|	with magical powers bountiful everroaringthese liberal heroes venerate thou singer.
आ वो यन्तूदवाहासो अद्य वर्ष्टिं ये विश्वे मरुतो जुनन्ति|	this day may all your waterbringers maruts they who impel the falling rain approach us.
अयं यो अग्निर मरुतः समिद्ध एतं जुषध्वं कवयो युवानः|	this fire o maruts hath been duly kindled let it find favour with you youthful sages.
यूयं राजानम इर्यं जनाय विभ्वतष्टं जनयथा यजत्राः|	ye raise up for the folk an active ruler whom holy ones a masters hand hath fashioned.
युष्मद एति मुष्टिहा बाहुजूतो युष्मद सदश्वो मरुतः सुवीरः|	ye send the fighter hand to hand armmighty and the brave hero maruts with good horses.
अरा इवेद अचरमा अहेव परपर जायन्ते अकवा महोभिः|	they spring forth more and more strong in their glories like days like spokes where none are last in order.
पर्श्नेः पुत्रा उपमासो रभिष्ठाः सवया मत्या मरुतः सम मिमिक्षुः|	highest and mightiest are the sons of pṛśni firm to their own intention cling the maruts.
यत परायासिष्ट पर्षतीभिर अश्वैर वीळुपविभिर मरुतो रथेभिः|	when ye have hastened on with spotted coursers o maruts on your cars with strongwrought fellies.
कषोदन्त आपो रिणते वनान्य अवोस्रियो वर्षभः करन्दतु दयौः|	the waters are disturbed the woods are shattered let dyaus the red steer send his thunder downward.
परथिष्ट यामन पर्थिवी चिद एषाम भर्तेव गर्भं सवम इच छवो धुः|	even earth hath spread herself wide at their coming and they as husbands have with power impregned her.
वातान हय अश्वान धुर्य रयुयुज्रे वर्षं सवेदं चक्रिरे रुद्रियासः|	they to the pole have yoked the winds for coursers their sweat have they made rain these sons of rudra.
हये नरो मरुतो मर्ळता नस तुवीमघासो अम्र्ता रतज्ञाः|	ho maruts heroes skilled in law immortal be gracious unto us ye rich in treasures.
सत्यश्रुतः कवयो युवानो बर्हद्गिरयो बर्हद उक्षमाणाः|	ye hearers of the truth ye sage and youthful grown mighty dwelling on the lofty mountains.
पुरूरुणा चिद धय अस्त्य अवो नूनं वां वरुण|	even far and wide o varuṇa and mitra doth your grace extend.
मित्र वंसि वां सुमतिम|	may i obtain your kind goodwill.
ता वां सम्यग अद्रुह्वाणेषम अश्याम धायसे|	from you benignant gods may we gain fully food for sustenance.
वयं ते रुद्रा सयाम|	such o ye rudras my we be.
पातं नो रुद्रा पायुभिर उत तरायेथां सुत्रात्रा|	guard us o rudras with your guar4 save us ye skilled to save my we.
तुर्याम दस्यून तनूभिः|	subdue the dasyus we ourselves.
मा कस्याद्भुतक्रतू यक्षम भुजेमा तनूभिः|	or neer may we o wondrous strong enjoy anothers solemn feast.
मा शेषसा मा तनसा|	ourselves our sons or progeny.
अछा वद तवसं गीर्भिर आभि सतुहि पर्जन्यं नमसा विवास|	sing with these songs thy welcome to the mighty with adoration praise and call parjanya.
कनिक्रदद वर्षभो जीरदानू रेतो दधात्य ओषधीषु गर्भम|	the bull loud roaring swift to send his bounty lays in the plants the seed for germination.
वि वर्क्षान हन्त्य उत हन्ति रक्षसो विश्वम बिभाय भुवनम महावधात|	he smites the trees apart he slays the demons all life fears him who wields the mighty weapon.
उतानागा ईषते वर्ष्ण्यावतो यत पर्जन्य सतनयन हन्ति दुष्क्र्तः|	from him exceeding strong fices een the guiltless when thundering parjanya smites the wicked.
रथीव कशयाश्वां अभिक्षिपन्न आविर दूतान कर्णुते वर्ष्य्रं अह|	like a cardriver whipping on his horses he makes the messengers of rain spring forward.
दूरात सिंहस्य सतनथा उद ईरते यत पर्जन्यः कर्णुते वर्ष्यं नभः|	far off resounds the roaring of the lion what time parjanya fills the sky with raincloud.
पर वाता वान्ति पतयन्ति विद्युत उद ओषधीर जिहते पिन्वते सवः|	forth burst the winds down come the lightningflashes the plants shoot up the realm of light is streaming.
इरा विश्वस्मै भुवनाय जायते यत पर्जन्यः पर्थिवीं रेतसावति|	food springs abundant for all living creatures what time parjanya quickens earth with moisture.
यस्य वरते पर्थिवी नन्नमीति यस्य वरते शफवज जर्भुरीति|	thou at whose bidding earth bows low before thee at whose command hoofed cattle fly in terror.
यस्य वरत ओषधीर विश्वरूपाः स नः पर्जन्य महि शर्म यछ|	at whose behest the plants assume all colours even thou parjanya yield us great protection.
दिवो नो वर्ष्टिम मरुतो ररीध्वम पर पिन्वत वर्ष्णो अश्वस्य धाराः|	send down for us the rain of heaven ye maruts and let the stallions flood descend in torrents.
अर्वाङ एतेन सतनयित्नुनेह्य अपो निषिञ्चन्न असुरः पिता नः|	come hither with this thunder while thou pourest the waters down our heavenly lord and father.
अभि करन्द सतनय गर्भम आ धा उदन्वता परि दीया रथेन|	thunder and roar the germ of life deposit fly round us on thy chariot waterladen.
दर्तिं सु कर्ष विषितं नयञ्चं समा भवन्तूद्वतो निपादाः|	thine opened waterskin draw with thee downward and let the hollows and the heights be level.
महान्तं कोशम उद अचा नि षिञ्च सयन्दन्तां कुल्या विषिताः पुरस्तात|	lift up the mighty vessel pour down water and let the liberated streams rush forward.
घर्तेन दयावाप्र्थिवी वय उन्धि सुप्रपाणम भवत्व अघ्न्याभ्यः|	saturate both the earth and heaven with fatness and for the cows let there be drink abundant.
यत पर्जन्य कनिक्रदत सतनयन हंसि दुष्क्र्तः|	when thou with thunder and with roar parjanya smitest sinners down.
परतीदं विश्वम मोदते यत किं च पर्थिव्याम अधि|	this universe exults thereat yea all that is upon the earth.
अवर्षीर वर्षम उद उ षू गर्भायाकर धन्वान्य अत्येतवा उ|	thou hast poured down the rainflood now withhold it thou hast made desert places fit for travel.
अजीजन ओषधीर भोजनाय कम उत परजाभ्यो ऽविदो मनीषाम|	thou hast made herbs to grow for our enjoyment yea thou hast won thee praise from living creatures.
पर विश्वसामन्न अत्रिवद अर्चा पावकशोचिषे|	like atri viśvasāman sing to him of purifying light.
यो अध्वरेष्व ईड्यो होता मन्द्रतमो विशि|	who must be praised in holy rites the priest most welcome in the house.
नय अग्निं जातवेदसं दधाता देवम रत्विजम|	set jātavedas in his place agni the god and minister.
पर यज्ञ एत्व आनुषग अद्या देवव्यचस्तमः|	let sacrifice proceed today duly comprising all the gods.
चिकित्विन्मनसं तवा देवम मर्तास ऊतये|	all mortals come to thee for aid the god of most observant mind.
वरेण्यस्य ते ऽवस इयानासो अमन्महि|	of thine excelling favour we bethink us as we long for it.
अग्ने चिकिद्ध्य अस्य न इदं वचः सहस्य|	mark with attention this our speech o agni thou victorious one.
तं तवा सुशिप्र दम्पते सतोमैर वर्धन्त्य अत्रयो गीर्भिः शुम्भन्त्य अत्रयः|	thee strongjawed as the homesteads lord the atris with their lauds exalt the atris beautify with songs.
तवम अग्ने वरुणो जायसे यत तवम मित्रो भवसि यत समिद्धः|	thou at thy birth art varuṇa o agni when thou art kindled thou becomest mitra.
तवे विश्वे सहसस पुत्र देवास तवम इन्द्रो दाशुषे मर्त्याय|	in thee o son of strength all gods are centred indra art thou to man who brings oblation.
तवम अर्यमा भवसि यत कनीनां नाम सवधावन गुह्यम बिभर्षि|	aryaman art thou as regardeth maidens mysterious is thy name o selfsustainer.
अञ्जन्ति मित्रं सुधितं न गोभिर यद दम्पती समनसा कर्णोषि|	as a kind friend with streams of milk they balm thee what time thou makest wife and lord oneminded.
तव शरिये मरुतो मर्जयन्त रुद्र यत ते जनिम चारु चित्रम|	the maruts deck their beauty for thy glory yea rudra for thy birth fair brightlycoloured.
पदं यद विष्णोर उपमं निधायि तेन पासि गुह्यं नाम गोनाम|	that which was fixed as viṣṇus loftiest stationtherewith the secret of the cows thou guardest.
तव शरिया सुद्र्शो देव देवाः पुरू दधाना अम्र्तं सपन्त|	gods through thy glory god who art so lovely granting abundant gifts gained life immortal.
होतारम अग्निम मनुषो नि षेदुर दशस्यन्त उशिजः शंसम आयोः|	as their own priest have men established agni and serve him fain for praise from him who liveth.
न तवद धोता पूर्वो अग्ने यजीयान न काव्यैः परो अस्ति सवधावः|	there is no priest more skilled than thou in worship none selfsustainer pass thee in wisdom.
विशश च यस्या अतिथिर भवासि स यज्ञेन वनवद देव मर्तान|	the man within whose house as guest thou dwellest o god by sacrifice shall conquer mortals.
वयम अग्ने वनुयाम तवोता वसूयवो हविषा बुध्यमानाः|	aided by thee o agni may we conquer through our oblation fain for wealth awakened.
वयं समर्ये विदथेष्व अह्नां वयं राया सहसस पुत्र मर्तान|	may we in battle in the days assemblies o son of strength by riches conquer mortals.
यो न आगो अभ्य एनो भरात्य अधीद अघम अघशंसे दधात|	he shall bring evil on the evilplotter whoever turns against us sin and outrage.
जही चिकित्वो अभिशस्तिम एताम अग्ने यो नो मर्चयति दवयेन|	destroy this calumny of him o agni whoever injures us with doubledealing.
तवाम अस्या वयुषि देव पूर्वे दूतं कर्ण्वाना अयजन्त हव्यैः|	at this dawns flushing god our ancient fathers served thee with offerings making thee their envoy.
संस्थे यद अग्न ईयसे रयीणां देवो मर्तैर वसुभिर इध्यमानः|	when agni to the store of wealth thou goest a god enkindled with good things by mortals.
अव सप्र्धि पितरं योधि विद्वान पुत्रो यस ते सहसः सून ऊहे|	save thou who knowest draw thy father near thee who counts as thine own son o child of power.
कदा चिकित्वो अभि चक्षसे नो ऽगने कदां रतचिद यातयासे|	o sapient agni when wilt thou regard us when skilled in holy law wilt thou direct us.
भूरि नाम वन्दमानो दधाति पिता वसो यदि तज जोषयासे|	adoring thee he gives thee many a title when thou good lord acceptest this as father.
कुविद देवस्य सहसा चकानः सुम्नम अग्निर वनते वाव्र्धानः|	and doth not agni glad in strength of godhead gain splendid bliss when he hath waxen mighty.
तवम अङग जरितारं यविष्ठ विश्वान्य अग्ने दुरिताति पर्षि|	most youthful agni verily thou bearest thy praiser safely over all his troubles.
सतेना अद्र्श्रन रिपवो जनासो ऽजञातकेता वर्जिना अभूवन|	thieves have been seen by us and open foemen unknown have been the plottings of the wicked.
इमे यामासस तवद्रिग अभूवन वसवे वा तद इद आगो अवाचि|	to thee these eulogies have been directed or to the vasu hath this sin been spoken.
नाहायम अग्निर अभिशस्तये नो न रीषते वाव्र्धानः परा दात|	but this our agni flaming high shall never yield us to calumny to him who wrongs us.
तवाम अग्ने हविष्मन्तो देवम मर्तास ईळते|	bearing oblations mortal men o agni worship thee the god.
मन्ये तवा जातवेदसं स हव्या वक्ष्य आनुषक|	i deem thee jātavedas bear our offerings thou unceasingly.
अग्निर होता दास्वतः कषयस्य वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	in the mans home who offers gifts where grass is trimmed agni is priest.
सं यज्ञासश चरन्ति यं सं वाजासः शरवस्यवः|	to whom all sacrifices come and strengthenings that win renown.
उत सम यं शिशुं यथा नवं जनिष्टारणी|	whom as an infant newlyborn the kindlingsticks have brought to life.
धर्तारम मानुषीणां विशाम अग्निं सवध्वरम|	sustainer of the tribes of men skilled in wellordered sacrifice.
उत सम दुर्ग्र्भीयसे पुत्रो न हवार्याणाम|	yea very hard art thou to grasp like offspring of the wriggling snakes.
पुरू यो दग्धासि वनाग्ने पशुर न यवसे|	when thou consumest many woods like an ox agni in the mead.
अध सम यस्यार्चयः सम्यक संयन्ति धूमिनः|	whose flames when thou art sending forth the smoke completely reach the mark.
यद ईम अह तरितो दिव्य उप धमातेव धमति शिशीते धमातरी यथा|	when tṛta in the height of heaven like as a smelter fanneth thee een as a smelter sharpeneth thee.
तवाहम अग्न ऊतिभिर मित्रस्य च परशस्तिभिः|	o agni by thy succour and by mitras friendly furtherance.
दवेषोयुतो न दुरिता तुर्याम मर्त्यानाम|	may we averting hate subdue the wickedness of mortal men.
तं नो अग्ने अभी नरो रयिं सहस्व आ भर|	o agni to our heroes bring such riches thou victorious god.
स कषेपयत स पोषयद भुवद वाजस्य सातय उतैधि पर्त्सु नो वर्धे|	may he protect and nourish us and help in gaining strength be thou near us in fight for our success.
पर वो मित्राय गायत वरुणाय विपा गिरा|	sing forth unto your varuṇa and mitra with a song inspired.
महिक्षत्राव रतम बर्हत|	they mighty lords are lofty law.
सम्राजा या घर्तयोनी मित्रश चोभा वरुणश च|	full springs of fatness sovran kings mitra and varuṇa the twain.
देवा देवेषु परशस्ता|	gods glorified among the gods.
ता नः शक्तम पार्थिवस्य महो रायो दिव्यस्य|	so help ye us to riches great terrestrial and celestial wealth.
महि वां कषत्रं देवेषु|	vast is your sway among the gods.
रतम रतेन सपन्तेषिरं दक्षम आशाते|	carefully tending law with law they have attained their vigorous might.
अद्रुहा देवौ वर्धेते|	the two gods wax devoid of guile.
वर्ष्टिद्यावा रीत्य्र्पेषस पती दानुमत्याः|	with rainy skies and streaming floods lords of the strength that bringeth gifts.
बर्हन्तं गर्तम आशाते|	a lofty seat have they attained.
अभ्य अवस्थाः पर जायन्ते पर वव्रेर वव्रिश चिकेत|	one state begets another state husk is made visible from husk.
उपस्थे मातुर वि चष्टे|	within his mothers side he speaks.
जुहुरे वि चितयन्तो ऽनिमिषं नर्म्णम पान्ति|	discerning have they offered gifts they guard the strength that never wastes.
आ दर्ळ्हाम पुरं विविशुः|	to a strong fort have they pressed in.
आ शवैत्रेयस्य जन्तवो दयुमद वर्धन्त कर्ष्टयः|	Śvaitreyas people all his men have gloriously increased in might.
निष्कग्रीवो बर्हदुक्थ एना मध्वा न वाजयुः|	a gold chain bṛhaduktha wears as through this soma seeking spoil.
परियं दुग्धं न काम्यम अजामि जाम्योः सचा|	i bring as twere the longedfor milk the dear milk of the sisterpair.
घर्मो न वाजजठरो ऽदब्धः शश्वतो दभः|	like to a caldron filled with food is he unconquered conquering all.
करीळन नो रश्म आ भुवः सम भस्मना वायुना वेविदानः|	beam of light come to us in sportive fashion finding thyself close to the wind that fans thee.
ता अस्य सन धर्षजो न तिग्माः सुसंशिता वक्ष्यो वक्षणेस्थाः|	these flames of his are wasting flames like arrows keenpointed sharpened on his breast.
वरुणं वो रिशादसम रचा मित्रं हवामहे|	you foemanslaying varuṇa and mitra we invoke with song.
परि वरजेव बाह्वोर जगन्वांसा सवर्णरम|	who as with penfold of your arms encompass round the realm of light.
ता बाहवा सुचेतुना पर यन्तम अस्मा अर्चते|	stretch out your arms with favouring love unto this man who singeth hymns.
शेवं हि जार्यं वां विश्वासु कषासु जोगुवे|	for in all places is sung forth your evergracious friendliness.
यन नूनम अश्यां गतिम मित्रस्य यायाम पथा|	that i may gain a refuge now may my steps be on mitras path.
अस्य परियस्य शर्मण्य अहिंसानस्य सश्चिरे|	men go protected in the charge of this dear friend who harms us not.
युवाभ्याम मित्रावरुणोपमं धेयाम रचा|	mitra and varuṇa from you may i by song win noblest meed.
यद ध कषये मघोनां सतोत्णां च सपूर्धसे|	that shall stir envy in the homes of wealthy chiefs and those who praise.
आ नो मित्र सुदीतिभिर वरुणश च सधस्थ आ|	with your fair splendours varuṇa and mitra to our gathering come.
सवे कषये मघोनां सखीनां च वर्धसे|	that in their homes the wealthy chiefs and they who are your friends may thrive.
युवं नो येषु वरुण कषत्रम बर्हच च बिभ्र्थः|	with those moreover among whom ye hold your high supremacy.
उरु णो वाजसातये कर्तं राये सवस्तये|	vouchsafe us room that we may win strength for prosperity and wealth.
उछन्त्याम मे यजता देवक्षत्रे रुशद्गवि|	when morning flushes holy ones in the gods realm where white cows shine.
सुतं सोमं न हस्तिभिर आ पड्भिर धावतं नरा बिभ्रताव अर्चनानसम|	supporting arcananas speed ye heroes with your active feet hither to my pressed soma juice.
अश्विनाव एह गछतं नासत्या मा वि वेनतम|	ye aśvins hither come to us nāsatyas be not disinclined.
हंसाव इव पततम आ सुतां उप|	fly hither like two swans unto the juice we shed.
अश्विना हरिणाव इव गौराव इवानु यवसम|	o aśvins like a pair of deer like two wild cattle to the mead.
हंसाव इव पततम आ सुतां उप|	fly hither like two swans unto the juice we shed.
अश्विना वाजिनीवसू जुषेथां यज्ञम इष्टये|	o aśvins rich in gifts accept our sacrifice to prosper it.
हंसाव इव पततम आ सुतां उप|	fly hither like two swans unto the juice we shed.
अत्रिर यद वाम अवरोहन्न रबीसम अजोहवीन नाधमानेव योषा|	as atri when descending to the cavern called on you loudly like a wailing woman.
शयेनस्य चिज जवसा नूतनेनागछतम अश्विना शंतमेन|	ye came to him o aśvins with the freshest and most auspicious fleetness of a falcon.
वि जिहीष्व वनस्पते योनिः सूष्यन्त्या इव|	tree part asunder like the side of her who bringeth forth a child.
शरुतम मे अश्विना हवं सप्तवध्रिं च मुञ्चतम|	ye aśvins listen to my call loose saptavadhri from his bonds.
भीताय नाधमानाय रषये सप्तवध्रये|	for saptavadhri for the seer affrighted when he wept and wailed.
मायाभिर अश्विना युवं वर्क्षं सं च वि चाचथः|	ye aśvins with your magic powers rent up the tree and shattered it.
यथा वातः पुष्करिणीं समिङगयति सर्वतः|	like as the wind on every side ruffles a pool of lotuses.
एवा ते गर्भ एजतु निरैतु दशमास्यः|	so stir in thee the babe unborn so may the tenmonth babe descend.
यथा वातो यथा वनं यथा समुद्र एजति|	like as the wind like as the wood like as the sea is set astir.
एवा तवं दशमास्य सहावेहि जरायुणा|	so also tenmonth babe descend together with the afterbirth.
दश मासाञ छशयानः कुमारो अधि मातरि|	the child who hath for ten months time been lying in his mothers side.
निरैतु जीवो अक्षतो जीवो जीवन्त्या अधि|	may he come forth alive unharmed yea living from the living dame.
पर व सपळ अक्रन सुविताय दावने ऽरचा दिवे पर पर्थिव्या रतम भरे|	your spy hath called to you to give prosperity i sing to heaven and earth and offer sacrifice.
उक्षन्ते अश्वान तरुषन्त आ रजो ऽनु सवम भानुं शरथयन्ते अर्णवैः|	they bathe their steeds and hasten through the firmament they spread abroad their radiance through the sea of cloud.
अमाद एषाम भियसा भूमिर एजति नौर न पूर्णा कषरति वयथिर यती|	earth shakes and reels in terror at their onward rush like a full ship which quivering lets the water in.
दूरेद्र्शो ये चितयन्त एमभिर अन्तर महे विदथे येतिरे नरः|	marked on their ways are they visible from afar the heroes press between in mighty armament.
गवाम इव शरियसे शर्ङगम उत्तमं सूर्यो न चक्षू रजसो विसर्जने|	as the exalted horn of bulls for splendid might as the suns eye set in the firmaments expanse.
अत्या इव सुभ्वश चारव सथन मर्या इव शरियसे चेतथा नरः|	like vigorous horses ye are beauteous to behold and for your glory show like bridegrooms o ye men.
को वो महान्ति महताम उद अश्नवत कस काव्या मरुतः को ह पौंस्या|	who o ye maruts may attain the mighty lore of you the mighty who may reach your manly deeds.
यूयं ह भूमिं किरणं न रेजथ पर यद भरध्वे सुविताय दावने|	ye verily make earth tremble like a ray of light what time ye bring your boons to give prosperity.
अश्वा इवेद अरुषासः सबन्धवः शूरा इव परयुधः परोत युयुधुः|	like steeds of ruddy colour scions of one race as foremost champions they have battled in the van.
मर्या इव सुव्र्धो वाव्र्धुर नरः सूर्यस्य चक्षुः पर मिनन्ति वर्ष्टिभिः|	the heroes have waxed strong like we1grown manly youths with floods of rain they make the suns eye fade away.
ते अज्येष्ठा अकनिष्ठास उद्भिदो ऽमध्यमासो महसा वि वाव्र्धुः|	having no eldest and no youngest in their band no middlomost preeminent they have waxed in might.
सुजातासो जनुषा पर्श्निमातरो दिवो मर्या आ नो अछा जिगातन|	these sons of pṛśni sprung of noble ancestry come hitberward to us ye bridegrooms of the sky.
वयो न ये शरेणीः पप्तुर ओजसान्तान दिवो बर्हतः सानुनस परि|	like birds of air they flew with might in lengthened lines from heavens high ridges to the borders of the sky.
अश्वास एषाम उभये यथा विदुः पर पर्वतस्य नभनूंर अचुच्यवुः|	the steeds who carry them as gods and mortals know have caused the waters of the mounuains to desgend.
मिमातु दयौर अदितिर वीतये नः सं दानुचित्रा उषसो यतन्ताम|	may dyaus the infinite roar for our banquet may dawns toil for us glittering with moisture.
आचुच्यवुर दिव्यं कोशम एत रषे रुद्रस्य मरुतो गर्णानाः|	lauded by thee these maruts sons o rudra o Ṛṣi have sent down the heavenly treasure.
ईळे अग्निं सववसं नमोभिर इह परसत्तो वि चयत कर्तं नः|	i laud with reverence the gracious agni here may he sit and part our meed among us.
रथैर इव पर भरे वाजयद्भिः परदक्षिणिन मरुतां सतोमम रध्याम|	as with spoilseeking cars i bring oblation turned rightward i will swell the maruts praisesong.
आ ये तस्थुः पर्षतीषु शरुतासु सुखेषु रुद्रा मरुतो रथेषु|	the maruts yea the rudras who have mounted their famous spotted deer and cars swiftmoving.
वना चिद उग्रा जिहते नि वो भिया पर्थिवी चिद रेजते पर्वतश चित|	before you fierce ones woods bow down in terror earth even the mountain trembles at your coming.
पर्वतश चिन महि वर्द्धो बिभाय दिवश चित सानु रेजत सवने वः|	though vast and tall the mountain is affrighted the height of heaven is shaken at your roaring.
यत करीळथ मरुत रष्टिमन्त आप इव सध्र्यञ्चो धवध्वे|	when armed with lances ye are sporting maruts and rush along together like the waters.
वरा इवेद रैवतासो हिरण्यैर अभि सवधाभिस तन्वः पिपिश्रे|	they like young suitors sons of wealthy houses have with their golden natures decked their bodies.
शरिये शरेयांसस तवसो रथेषु सत्रा महांसि चक्रिरे तनूषु|	strong on their cars the lordly ones for glory have set their splendours on their forms for ever.
अज्येष्ठासो अकनिष्ठास एते सम भरातरो वाव्र्धुः सौभगाय|	none being eldest none among them youngest as brothers they have grown to happy fortune.
युवा पिता सवपा रुद्र एषां सुदुघा पर्श्निः सुदिना मरुद्भ्यः|	may their sire rudra young and deft and pṛśni pouring much milk bring fair days to the maruts.
यद उत्तमे मरुतो मध्यमे वा यद वावमे सुभगासो दिवि षठ|	whether o blessed maruts ye be dwelling in highest midmost or in lowest heaven.
अतो नो रुद्रा उत वा नव अस्याग्ने वित्ताद धविषो यद यजाम|	thence o ye rudras and thou also agni notice the sacrificial food we offer.
अग्निश च यन मरुतो विश्ववेदसो दिवो वहध्व उत्तराद अधि षणुभिः|	o maruts lords of all when agni and when ye drive downward from sublimest heaven along the heights.
ते मन्दसाना धुनयो रिशादसो वामं धत्त यजमानाय सुन्वते|	shakers of all rejoicing slayers of the foe give riches to the somapressing worshipper.
अग्ने मरुद्भिः शुभयद्भिर रक्वभिः सोमम पिब मन्दसानो गणश्रिभिः|	o agni with the maruts as they gleam and sing gathered in troop rejoicing drink the soma juice.
पावकेभिर विश्वमिन्वेभिर आयुभिर वैश्वानर परदिवा केतुना सजूः|	with these the living ones who cleanse and further all joined with thy banner o vaiśvānara from of old.
कूष्ठो देवाव अश्विनाद्या दिवो मनावसू|	where in the heavens are ye today gods aśvins rich in constancy.
तच छरवथो वर्षण्वसू अत्रिर वाम आ विवासति|	hear this ye excellent as steers atri inviteth you to come.
कुह तया कुह नु शरुता दिवि देवा नासत्या|	where are they now where are the twain the famed nāsatyas gods in heaven.
कस्मिन्न आ यतथो जने को वां नदीनां सचा|	who is the man ye strive to reach who of your suppliants is with you.
कं याथः कं ह गछथः कम अछा युञ्जाथे रथम|	whom do ye visit whom approach to whom direct your harnessed car.
कस्य बरह्माणि रण्यथो वयं वाम उश्मसीष्टये|	with whose devotions are ye pleased we long for you to further us.
पौरं चिद धय उदप्रुतम पौर पौराय जिन्वथः|	ye strengtheners for paura stir the filler swimming in the flood.
यद ईं गर्भीततातये सिंहम इव दरुहस पदे|	advancing to be captured like a lion to the ambuscade.
पर चयवानाज जुजुरुषो वव्रिम अत्कं न मुञ्चथः|	ye from cyavana worn with age removed his skin as twere a robe.
युवा यदी कर्थः पुनर आ कामम रण्वे वध्वः|	so when ye made him young again he stirred the longing of a dame.
अस्ति हि वाम इह सतोता समसि वां संद्र्शि शरिये|	here is the man who lauds you both to see your glory are we here.
नू शरुतम म आ गतम अवोभिर वाजिनीवसू|	now bear me come with saving help ye who are rich in store of wealth.
को वाम अद्य पुरूणाम आ वव्ने मर्त्यानाम|	who among many mortal men this day hath won you to himself.
को विप्रो विप्रवाहसा को यज्ञैर वाजिनीवसू|	what bard accepters of the bard who rich in wealth with sacrifice.
आ वां रथो रथानां येष्ठो यात्व अश्विना|	o aśvins may your car approach most excellent of cars for speed.
पुरू चिद अस्मयुस तिर आङगूषो मर्त्येष्व आ|	through many regions may our praise pass onward among mortal men.
शम ऊ षु वाम मधूयुवास्माकम अस्तु चर्क्र्तिः|	may our laudation of you twain lovers of meath be sweet to you.
अर्वाचीना विचेतसा विभिः शयेनेव दीयतम|	fly hitherward ye wise of heart like falcons with your winged steeds.
अश्विना यद ध कर्हि चिच छुश्रूयातम इमं हवम|	o aśvins when at any time ye listen to this call of mine.
वस्वीर ऊ षु वाम भुजः पर्ञ्चन्ति सु वाम पर्चः|	for you is dainty food prepared they mix refreshing food for you.
सखायः सं वः सम्यञ्चम इषं सतोमं चाग्नये|	offer to agni o my friends your seemly food your seemly praise.
वर्षिष्ठाय कषितीनाम ऊर्जो नप्त्रे सहस्वते|	to him supremest oer the folk the son of strength the mighty lord.
कुत्रा चिद यस्य सम्र्तौ रण्वा नरो नर्षदने|	him in whose presence when they meet in full assembly men rejoice.
अर्हन्तश चिद यम इन्धते संजनयन्ति जन्तवः|	even him whom worthy ones inflame and living creatures bring to life.
सं यद इषो वनामहे सं हव्या मानुषाणाम|	when we present to him the food and sacrificial gifts of men.
उत दयुम्नस्य शवस रतस्य रश्मिम आ ददे|	he by the might of splendour grasps the holy ordinances rein.
स समा कर्णोति केतुम आ नक्तं चिद दूर आ सते|	he gives a signal in the night even to him who is afar.
पावको यद वनस्पतीन पर समा मिनात्य अजरः|	when he the bright unchanged by eld consumes the sovrans of the wood.
अव सम यस्य वेषणे सवेदम पथिषु जुह्वति|	he in whose service on the ways they offer up their drops of sweat.
अभीम अह सवजेन्यम भूमा पर्ष्ठेव रुरुहुः|	on him is their high kin have they mounted as ridges on the earth.
यम मर्त्यः पुरुस्प्र्हं विदद विश्वस्य धायसे|	whom sought of many mortal man hath found to be the stay of all.
पर सवादनम पितूनाम अस्ततातिं चिद आयवे|	he who gives flavour to our food the home of every man that lives.
स हि षमा धन्वाक्षितं दाता न दात्य आ पशुः|	even as a herd that crops the grass he shears the field and wilderness.
हिरिश्मश्रुः शुचिदन्न रभुर अनिभ्र्ष्टतविषिः|	with flashing teeth and beard of gold deft with his unabated might.
शुचिः षमा यस्मा अत्रिवत पर सवधितीव रीयते|	for him to whom bright as an axe he as to atri hath flashed forth.
सुषूर असूत माता कराणा यद आनशे भगम|	hath the wellbearing mother borne producing when her time is come.
आ यस ते सर्पिरासुते ऽगने शम अस्ति धायसे|	agni to whom the oil is shed by him thou lovest to support.
ऐषु दयुम्नम उत शरव आ चित्तम मर्त्येषु धाः|	bestow upon these mortals fame and splendour and intelligence.
इति चिन मन्युम अध्रिजस तवादातम आ पशुं ददे|	such zeal hath he resistless one he gained the cattle given by thee.
आद अग्ने अप्र्णतो ऽतरिः सासह्याद दस्यून इषः सासह्यान नॄन|	agni may atri overcome the dasyus who bestow no gifts subdue the men who give no food.
इन्द्रो रथाय परवतं कर्णोति यम अध्यस्थान मघवा वाजयन्तम|	maghavan indra turns his chariot downward the strengthdisplaying car which he hath mounted.
यूथेव पश्वो वय उनोति गोपा अरिष्टो याति परथमः सिषासन|	even as a herdsman driveth forth his cattle he goeth first uninjured fain for treasure.
आ पर दरव हरिवो मा वि वेनः पिशङगराते अभि नः सचस्व|	haste to us lord of bays be not ungracious visit us lover of goldhued oblation.
नहि तवद इन्द्र वस्यो अन्यद अस्त्य अमेनांश चिज जनिवतश चकर्थ|	there is naught else better than thou art indra een to the wifeless hast thou given spouses.
उद यत सहः सहस आजनिष्ट देदिष्ट इन्द्र इन्द्रियाणि विश्वा|	when out of strength arose the strength that conquers indra displayed all powers that he possesses.
पराचोदयत सुदुघा वव्रे अन्तर वि जयोतिषा संवव्र्त्वत तमो ऽवः|	forth from the cave he drove the milky mothers and with the light laid bare investing darkness.
अनवस ते रथम अश्वाय तक्षन तवष्टा वज्रम पुरुहूत दयुमन्तम|	anus have wrought a chariot for thy courser and tvaṣṭar muchinvoked thy bolt that glitters.
बरह्माण इन्द्रम महयन्तो अर्कैर अवर्धयन्न अहये हन्तवा उ|	the brahmans with their songs exalting indra increased his strength that he might slaughter ahi.
वर्ष्णे यत ते वर्षणो अर्कम अर्चान इन्द्र गरावाणो अदितिः सजोषाः|	when heroes sang their laud to thee the hero indra and stones and aditi accordant.
अनश्वासो ये पवयो ऽरथा इन्द्रेषिता अभ्य अवर्तन्त दस्यून|	without or steed or chariot were the fellies which sped by indra rolled upon the dasytis.
पर ते पूर्वाणि करणानि वोचम पर नूतना मघवन या चकर्थ|	i will declare thine exploits wrought aforetime and maghavan thy deeds of late achievement.
शक्तीवो यद विभरा रोदसी उभे जयन्न अपो मनवे दानुचित्राः|	when lord of might thou sunderedst earth and heaven winning for man the moistlygleaming waters.
तद इन नु ते करणं दस्म विप्राहिं यद घनन्न ओजो अत्रामिमीथाः|	this is thy deed een this wonderful singer that slaying ahi here thy strength thou showedst.
शुष्णस्य चित परि माया अग्र्भ्णाः परपित्वं यन्न अप दस्यूंर असेधः|	didst check and stay een gusnas wiles and magic and drawing nigh didst chase away the dasytis.
तवम अपो यदवे तुर्वशायारमयः सुदुघाः पार इन्द्र|	thou indra on the farther bank foryadu and turvaga didst stay the gushing waters.
उग्रम अयातम अवहो ह कुत्सं सं ह यद वाम उशनारन्त देवाः|	ye both assailed the fierce thou barest kutsa when gods and uśanā came to you together.
इन्द्राकुत्सा वहमाना रथेना वाम अत्या अपि कर्णे वहन्तु|	let the steeds bring you both indra and kutsa borne on the chariot within hearingdistance.
निः षीम अद्भ्यो धमथो निः षधस्थान मघोनो हर्दो वरथस तमांसि|	ye blew him from the waters from his dwelling and chased the darkness from the nobles spirit.
वातस्य युक्तान सुयुजश चिद अश्वान कविश चिद एषो अजगन्न अवस्युः|	even this sage hath come looking for succour even to vātas docile harnessed horses.
विश्वे ते अत्र मरुतः सखाय इन्द्र बरह्माणि तविषीम अवर्धन|	here are the maruts all thy dear companions prayers have increased thy power and might o indra.
सूरश चिद रथम परितक्म्यायाम पूर्वं करद उपरं जूजुवांसम|	when night was near its close he carried forward een the suns chariot backward in its running.
भरच चक्रम एतशः सं रिणाति पुरो दधत सनिष्यति करतुं नः|	etaga brought his wheel and firmly stays it setting it eastward he shall give us courage.
आयं जना अभिचक्षे जगामेन्द्रः सखायं सुतसोमम इछन|	this indra o ye men hath come to see you seeking a friend who hath expressed the soma.
वदन गरावाव वेदिम भरियाते यस्य जीरम अध्वर्यवश चरन्ति|	the creaking stone is laid upon the altar and the adhvaryus come to turn it quickly.
ये चाकनन्त चाकनन्त नू ते मर्ता अम्र्त मो ते अंह आरन|	let mortals who were happy still be happy let them not come to sorrow o immortal.
वावन्धि यज्यूंर उत तेषु धेह्य ओजो जनेषु येषु ते सयाम|	love thou the pious and to these thy peoplewith whom may we be numberedgive thou vigour.
पर शयावाश्व धर्ष्णुयार्चा मरुद्भिर रक्वभिः|	sing boldly forth Śyāvāśva with the maruts who are loud in song.
ये अद्रोघम अनुष्वधं शरवो मदन्ति यज्ञियाः|	who holy as their wont is joy in glory that is free from guile.
ते हि सथिरस्य शवसः सखायः सन्ति धर्ष्णुया|	for in their boldness they are friends of firm and sure heroic strength.
ते यामन्न आ धर्षद्विनस तमना पान्ति शश्वतः|	they in their course boldspirited guard all men of their own accord.
ते सयन्द्रासो नोक्षणो ऽति षकन्दन्ति शर्वरीः|	like steers in rapid motion they advance and overtake the nights.
मरुताम अधा महो दिवि कषमा च मन्महे|	and thus the maruts power in heaven and on the earth we celebrate.
मरुत्सु वो दधीमहि सतोमं यज्ञं च धर्ष्णुया|	with boldness to your maruts let us offer laud and sacrifice.
विश्वे ये मानुषा युगा पान्ति मर्त्यं रिषः|	who all through ages of mankind guard mortal man from injury.
अर्हन्तो ये सुदानवो नरो असामिशवसः|	praiseworthy givers of good gifts heroes with full and perfect strength.
पर यज्ञं यज्ञियेभ्यो दिवो अर्चा मरुद्भ्यः|	to maruts holy ones of heaven will i extol the sacrifice.
आ रुक्मैर आ युधा नर रष्वा रष्टीर अस्र्क्षत|	the lofty heroes cast their spears and weapons bright with gleaming gold.
अन्व एनां अह विद्युतो मरुतो जज्झतीर इव भानुर अर्त तमना दिवः|	after these maruts followed close like laughing lightning from the sky a splendour of its own accord.
ये वाव्र्धन्त पार्थिवा य उराव अन्तरिक्ष आ|	they who waxed mighty of the earth they who are in the wide midair.
वर्जने वा नदीनां सधस्थे वा महो दिवः|	or in the rivers compass or in the abode of ample heaven.
शर्धो मारुतम उच छंस सत्यशवसम रभ्वसम|	praise thou the maruts company the valorous and truly strong.
उत सम ते शुभे नरः पर सयन्द्रा युजत तमना|	the heroes hasting by themselves have yoked their deer for victory.
उत सम ते परुष्ण्याम ऊर्णा वसत शुन्ध्यवः|	fairgleaming on paruṣṇī they have clothed themselves in robes of wool.
उत पव्या रथानाम अद्रिम भिन्दन्त्य ओजसा|	and with their chariot tires they cleave the rock asunder in their might.
आपथयो विपथयो ऽनतस्पथा अनुपथाः|	whether as wanderers from the way or speeders on or to the path.
एतेभिर मह्यं नामभिर यज्ञं विष्टार ओहते|	under these names the spreading band tend well the sacrifice for me.
अधा नरो नय ओहते ऽधा नियुत ओहते|	to this the heroes well attend well do their teams attend to this.
अधा पारावता इति चित्रा रूपाणि दर्श्या|	visible are their varied forms behold they are paravatas.
छन्दस्तुभः कुभन्यव उत्सम आ कीरिणो नर्तुः|	hymnsinging seeking water they praising have danced about the spring.
ते मे के चिन न तायव ऊमा आसन दर्शि तविषे|	what are they unto me no thieves but helpers splendid to behold.
य रष्वा रष्टिविद्युतः कवयः सन्ति वेधसः|	sublime with lightnings for their spears sages and orderers are they.
तम रषे मारुतं गणं नमस्या रमया गिरा|	Ṛṣi adore that marut host and make them happy with thy song.
अछ रषे मारुतं गणं दाना मित्रं न योषणा|	Ṛṣi invite the marut band with offerings as a maid her friend.
दिवो वा धर्ष्णव ओजसा सतुता धीभिर इषण्यत|	from heaven too bold ones in your might haste hither glorified with songs.
नू मन्वान एषां देवां अछा न वक्षणा|	thinking of these now let him come as with the escort of the gods.
दाना सचेत सूरिभिर यामश्रुतेभिर अञ्जिभिः|	and with the splendid princes famed for rapid courses to the gifts.
पर ये मे बन्ध्वेषे गां वोचन्त सूरयः पर्श्निं वोचन्त मातरम|	princes who when i asked their kin named pṛśni as their mothercow.
अधा पितरम इष्मिणं रुद्रं वोचन्त शिक्वसः|	and the impetuous rudra they the mighty ones declared their sire.
सप्त मे सप्त शाकिन एकमएका शता ददुः|	the mighty ones the seven times seven have singly given me hundred gifts.
यमुनायाम अधि शरुतम उद राधो गव्यम मर्जे नि राधो अश्व्यम मर्जे|	i have obtained on yamuna famed wealth in kine and wealth in steeds.
अजातशत्रुम अजरा सवर्वत्य अनु सवधामिता दस्मम ईयते|	boundless and wasting not the heavenly food of gods goes to the foeless one doer of wondrous deeds.
सुनोतन पचत बरह्मवाहसे पुरुष्टुताय परतरं दधातन|	press out make ready offer gifts with special zeal to him whom many laud accepter of the prayer.
आ यः सोमेन जठरम अपिप्रतामन्दत मघवा मध्वो अन्धसः|	he who filled full his belly with the somas juice maghavan was delighted with the meaths sweet draught.
यद ईम मर्गाय हन्तवे महावधः सहस्रभ्र्ष्टिम उशना वधं यमत|	when uśanā that he might slay the monstrous beast gave him the mighty weapon with a thousand points.
यो अस्मै घरंस उत वा य ऊधनि सोमं सुनोति भवति दयुमां अह|	illustrious is the man whoever presseth out soma for him in sunshine or in cloud and rain.
अपाप शक्रस ततनुष्टिम ऊहति तनूशुभ्रम मघवा यः कवासखः|	the mighty maghavan who is the sages friend advanceth more and more his beauteous progeny.
यस्यावधीत पितरं यस्य मातरं यस्य शक्रो भरातरं नात ईषते|	the strong god doth not flee away from him whose sire whose mother or whose brother he hath done to death.
वेतीद व अस्य परयता यतंकरो न किल्बिषाद ईषते वस्व आकरः|	he the avenger seeketh this mans offered gifts this god the source of riches doth not flee from sin.
न पञ्चभिर दशभिर वष्ट्य आरभं नासुन्वता सचते पुष्यता चन|	he seeks no enterprise with five or ten to aid nor stays with him who pours no juice though prospering well.
जिनाति वेद अमुया हन्ति वा धुनिर आ देवयुम भजति गोमति वरजे|	the shaker conquers or slays in this way or that and to the pious gives a stable full of kine.
वित्वक्षणः सम्र्तौ चक्रमासजो ऽसुन्वतो विषुणः सुन्वतो वर्धः|	exceeding strong in war he stays the chariot wheel and hating him who pours not prospers him who pours.
इन्द्रो विश्वस्य दमिता विभीषणो यथावशं नयति दासम आर्यः|	indra the terrible tamer of every man as Ārya leads away the dāsa at his will.
सम ईम पणेर अजति भोजनम मुषे वि दाशुषे भजति सूनरं वसु|	he gathers up for plunder all the niggards gear excellent wealth he gives to him who offers gifts.
दुर्गे चन धरियते विश्व आ पुरु जनो यो अस्य तविषीम अचुक्रुधत|	not even in wide stronghold may all the folk stand firm who have provoked to anger his surpassing might.
सं यज जनौ सुधनौ विश्वशर्धसाव अवेद इन्द्रो मघवा गोषु शुभ्रिषु|	when indra maghavan hath marked two wealthy men fighting for beauteous cows with all their followers.
युजं हय अन्यम अक्र्त परवेपन्य उद ईं गव्यं सर्जते सत्वभिर धुनिः|	he who stirs all things takes one as his close ally and shaker with his heroes sends the kine to him.
सहस्रसाम आग्निवेशिं गर्णीषे शत्रिम अग्न उपमां केतुम अर्यः|	agni i laud the liberal agnivesi satri the type and standard of the pious.
तस्मा आपः संयतः पीपयन्त तस्मिन कषत्रम अमवत तवेषम अस्तु|	may the collected waters yield him plenty and his be powerful and bright dominion.
अछा वो अग्निम अवसे देवं गासि स नो वसुः|	i will sing near for grace your god agni for he is good to us.
रासत पुत्र रषूणाम रतावा पर्षति दविषः|	son of the brands may he give gifts and righteous save us from the foe.
स हि सत्यो यम पूर्वे चिद देवासश चिद यम ईधिरे|	for he is true whom men of old enkindled and the gods themselves.
होतारम मन्द्रजिह्वम इत सुदीतिभिर विभावसुम|	the priest with the delicious tongue rich with the light of glorious beams.
स नो धीती वरिष्ठया शरेष्ठया च सुमत्या|	with wisdom that surpasseth all with gracious will most excellent.
अग्ने रायो दिदीहि नः सुव्र्क्तिभिर वरेण्य|	o agni worthy of our choice shine wealth on us through hymns of praise.
अग्निर देवेषु राजत्य अग्निर मर्तेष्व आविशन|	agni is king for he extends to mortals and to gods alike.
अग्निर नो हव्यवाहनो ऽगनिं धीभिः सपर्यत|	agni is bearer of our gifts worship ye agni with your thoughts.
अग्निस तुविश्रवस्तमं तुविब्रह्माणम उत्तमम|	agni gives to the worshipper a son the best of mightiest fame.
अतूर्तं शरावयत्पतिम पुत्रं ददाति दाशुषे|	of deep devotion neer subdued bringer of glory to his sire.
अग्निर ददाति सत्पतिं सासाह यो युधा नर्भिः|	agni bestows the herolord who conquers with the men in fight.
अग्निर अत्यं रघुष्यदं जेतारम अपराजितम|	agni bestows the fleetfoot steed the victor never overcome.
यद वाहिष्ठं तद अग्नये बर्हद अर्च विभावसो|	the mightiest song is agnis shine on high thou who art rich in light.
महिषीव तवद रयिस तवद वाजा उद ईरते|	like the chief consort of a king riches and strength proceed from thee.
तव दयुमन्तो अर्चयो गरावेवोच्यते बर्हत|	resplendent are thy rays of light loud is thy voice like pressingstones.
उतो ते तन्यतुर यथा सवानो अर्त तमना दिवः|	yea of itself thy thunder goes forth like the roaring of the heaven.
एवां अग्निं वसूयवः सहसानं ववन्दिम|	thus seeking riches have we paid homage to agni conqueror.
स नो विश्वा अति दविषः पर्षन नावेव सुक्रतुः|	may he most wise as with a ship carry us over all our foes.
कद उ परियाय धाम्ने मनामहे सवक्षत्राय सवयशसे महे वयम|	what may we meditate for the beloved power mighty in native strength and glorious in itself.
आमेन्यस्य रजसो यद अभ्र आं अपो वर्णाना वितनोति मायिनी|	which as a magic energy seeking waters spreads even to theimmeasurable middle regions cloud.
ता अत्नत वयुनं वीरवक्षणं समान्या वर्तया विश्वम आ रजः|	oer all the region with their uniform advance these have spread out the lore that giveth heroes strength.
अपो अपाचीर अपरा अपेजते पर पूर्वाभिस तिरते देवयुर जनः|	back with their course reversed the others pass away the pious lengthens life with those that are before.
आ गरावभिर अहन्येभिर अक्तुभिर वरिष्ठं वज्रम आ जिघर्ति मायिनि|	with pressingstones and with the bright beams of the day he hurls his broadest bolt against the guileful one.
शतं वा यस्य परचरन सवे दमे संवर्तयन्तो वि च वर्तयन्न अहा|	even he whose hundred wander in his own abode driving the days afar and bringing them again.
ताम अस्य रीतिम परशोर इव परत्य अनीकम अख्यम भुजे अस्य वर्पसः|	i to enjoy the beauty of his form behold that rapid rush of his as twere an axes edge.
सचा यदि पितुमन्तम इव कषयं रत्नं दधाति भरहूतये विशे|	what time he gives the man who calls on him in fight wealth like a dwellinghouse filled full with store of food.
स जिह्वया चतुरनीक रञ्जते चारु वसानो वरुणो यतन्न अरिम|	fourfaced and nobly clad varuṇa urging on the pious to his task stirs himself with the tongue.
न तस्य विद्म पुरुषत्वता वयं यतो भगः सविता दाति वार्यम|	naught by our human nature do we know of him him from whom bhaga savitar bestows the boon.
आ भात्य अग्निर उषसाम अनीकम उद विप्राणां देवया वाचो अस्थुः|	agni the bright face of the dawns is shining the singers pious voices have ascended.
अर्वाञ्चा नूनं रथ्येह यातम पीपिवांसम अश्विना घर्मम अछ|	borne on your chariot aśvins turn you hither and come unto our full and rich libation.
न संस्क्र्तम पर मिमीतो गमिष्ठान्ति नूनम अश्विनोपस्तुतेह|	most frequent guests they scorn not what is ready even now the lauded aśvins are beside us.
दिवाभिपित्वे ऽवसागमिष्ठा परत्य अवर्तिं दाशुषे शम्भविष्ठा|	with promptest aid they come at morn and evening the worshippers most blessed guards from trouble.
उता यातं संगवे परातर अह्नो मध्यंदिन उदिता सूर्यस्य|	yea come at milkingtime at early morning at noon of day and when the sun is setting.
दिवा नक्तम अवसा शंतमेन नेदानीम पीतिर अश्विना ततान|	by day by night with favour most auspicious not only now the draught hath drawn the aśvins.
इदं हि वाम परदिवि सथानम ओक इमे गर्हा अश्विनेदं दुरोणम|	for this place aśvins was of old your dwelling these were your houses this your habitation.
आ नो दिवो बर्हतः पर्वताद आद्भ्यो यातम इषम ऊर्जं वहन्ता|	come to us from high heaven and from the mountain come from the waters bringing food and vigour.
सम अश्विनोर अवसा नूतनेन मयोभुवा सुप्रणीती गमेम|	may we obtain the aśvins newest favour and gain their healthbestowing happy guidance.
आ नो रयिं वहतम ओत वीरान आ विश्वान्य अम्र्ता सौभगानि|	bring riches hither unto us and heroes and all felicity and joy immortals.
महे नो अद्य बोधयोषो राये दिवित्मती|	o heavenly dawn awaken us to ample opulence today.
यथा चिन नो अबोधयः सत्यश्रवसि वाय्ये सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	even as thou hast wakened us with satyasravas vayyas son highborn delightful with thy steeds.
या सुनीथे शौचद्रथे वय औछो दुहितर दिवः|	daughter of heaven thou dawnedst on sunitha sucadrathas son.
सा वय उछ सहीयसि सत्यश्रवसि वाय्ये सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	so dawn thou on one mightier still on satyasravas vayyas son highborn delightful with thy steeds.
सा नो अद्याभरद्वसुर वय उछा दुहितर दिवः|	so bringing treasure dawn today on us thou daughter of the sky.
यो वय औछः सहीयसि सत्यश्रवसि वाय्ये सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	as thou o mightier yet didst shine for satyatravas vayyas son highborn delightful with thy steeds.
अभि ये तवा विभावरि सतोमैर गर्णन्ति वह्नयः|	here round about thee are the priests who laud thee bright one with their hymns.
मघैर मघोनि सुश्रियो दामन्वन्तः सुरातयः सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	and men with gifts o bounteous dame splendid with wealth and offering much highborn delightful with thy steeds.
यच चिद धि ते गणा इमे छदयन्ति मघत्तये|	whatever these thy bands perform to please thee or to win them wealth.
परि चिद वष्टयो दधुर ददतो राधो अह्रयं सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	een fain they gird us round and give rich gifts which neer are reft away highborn delightful with thy steeds.
ऐषु धा वीरवद यश उषो मघोनि सूरिषु|	give to these wealthy patrons fame o affluent dawn with hero sons.
ये नो राधांस्य अह्रया मघवानो अरासत सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	to these our princes who have brought rich gifts neer to be reft away highborn delightful with thy steeds.
तेभ्यो दयुम्नम बर्हद यश उषो मघोन्य आ वह|	bring lofty and resplendent fame o thou munificent dawn to these.
ये नो राधांस्य अश्व्या गव्या भजन्त सूरयः सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	our wealthy patrons who bestow rich gifts on us of steeds and kine highborn delightful with thy steeds.
उत नो गोमतीर इष आ वहा दुहितर दिवः|	bring us o daughter of the sky subsistence in our herds of kine.
साकं सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिः शुक्रैः शोचद्भिर अर्चिभिः सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	together with the sunbeams with the shine of pure refulgent flames highborn delightful with thy steeds.
वय उछा दुहितर दिवो मा चिरं तनुथा अपः|	o daughter of the sky shine forth delay not to perform thy task.
नेत तवा सतेनं यथा रिपुं तपाति सूरो अर्चिषा सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	let not the sun with fervent heat consume thee like a robber foe highborn delightful with the steeds.
एतावद वेद उषस तवम भूयो वा दातुम अर्हसि|	so much and more exceedingly o dawn it suits thee to bestow.
या सतोत्र्भ्यो विभावर्य उछन्ती न परमीयसे सुजाते अश्वसून्र्ते|	thou radiant one who ceasest not to shine for those who sing thy praise highborn delightful with thy steeds.
हयो न विद्वां अयुजि सवयं धुरि तां वहामि परतरणीम अवस्युवम|	well knowing i have bound me horselike to the pole i carry that which bears as on and gives us help.
नास्या वश्मि विमुचं नाव्र्तम पुनर विद्वान पथः पुरेत रजु नेषति|	i seek for no release no turning back therefrom may he who knows the way the leader guide me straight.
अग्न इन्द्र वरुण मित्र देवाः शर्धः पर यन्त मारुतोत विष्णो|	o agni indra varuṇa and mitra give o ye gods and marut host and viṣṇu.
उभा नासत्या रुद्रो अध गनाः पूषा भगः सरस्वती जुषन्त|	may both nāsatyas rudra heavenly matrons pūṣan sarasvatī bhaga accept us.
इन्द्राग्नी मित्रावरुणादितिं सवः पर्थिवीं दयाम मरुतः पर्वतां अपः|	indra and agni mitra varuṇa aditi the waters mountains maruts sky and earth and heaven.
हुवे विष्णुम पूषणम बरह्मणस पतिम भगं नु शंसं सवितारम ऊतये|	viṣṇu i call pūṣan and brahmaṇaspati and bhaga samsa savitar that they may help.
उत नो विष्णुर उत वातो अस्रिधो दरविणोदा उत सोमो मयस करत|	may viṣṇu also and vāta who injures none and soma granter of possessions give us joy.
उत रभव उत राये नो अश्विनोत तवष्टोत विभ्वानु मंसते|	and may the Ṛbhus and the aśvins tvaṣṭar and vibhvan remember us so that we may have wealth.
उत तयन नो मारुतं शर्ध आ गमद दिविक्षयं यजतम बर्हिर आसदे|	so may the band of maruts dwelling in the sky the holy come to us to sit on sacred grass.
बर्हस्पतिः शर्म पूषोत नो यमद वरूथ्यं वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	bṛhaspati and pūṣan grant us sure defence varuṇa mitra aryaman guard and shelter us.
उत तये नः पर्वतासः सुशस्तयः सुदीतयो नद्यस तरामणे भुवन|	and may the mountains famed in noble eulogies and the fairgleaming rivers keep us safe from harm.
भगो विभक्ता शवसावसा गमद उरुव्यचा अदितिः शरोतु मे हवम|	may bhaga the dispenser come with power and grace and farpervading aditi listen to my call.
देवानाम पत्नीर उशतीर अवन्तु नः परावन्तु नस तुजये वाजसातये|	may the gods spouses aid us of their own freewill aid us to offspring and the winning of the spoil.
याः पार्थिवासो या अपाम अपि वरते ता नो देवीः सुहवाः शर्म यछत|	grant us protection o ye gracious goddesses ye who are on the earth or in the waters realm.
उत गना वयन्तु देवपत्नीर इन्द्राण्य अग्नाय्य अश्विनी राट|	may the dames wives of gods enjoy our presents rat aśvini agnāyī and indrāṇī.
आ रोदसी वरुणानी शर्णोतु वयन्तु देवीर य रतुर जनीनाम|	may rodasī and varuṇānī hear us and goddesses come at the matrons season.
जनस्य गोपा अजनिष्ट जाग्र्विर अग्निः सुदक्षः सुविताय नव्यसे|	the watchful guardian of the people hath been born agni the very strong for fresh prosperity.
घर्तप्रतीको बर्हता दिविस्प्र्शा दयुमद वि भाति भरतेभ्यः शुचिः|	with oil upon his face with high heaventouching flame he shineth splendidly pure for the bharatas.
यज्ञस्य केतुम परथमम पुरोहितम अग्निं नरस तरिषधस्थे सम ईधिरे|	ensign of sacrifice the earliest householdpriest the men have kindled agni in his threefold seat.
इन्द्रेण देवैः सरथं स बर्हिषि सीदन नि होता यजथाय सुक्रतुः|	with indra and the gods together on the grass let the wise priest sit to complete the sacrifice.
असम्म्र्ष्टो जायसे मात्रोः शुचिर मन्द्रः कविर उद अतिष्ठो विवस्वतः|	pure  unadorned from thy two mothers art thou born thou camest from vivasvān as a charming sage.
घर्तेन तवावर्धयन्न अग्न आहुत धूमस ते केतुर अभवद दिवि शरितः|	with oil they strengthened thee o agni worshipped god thy banner was the smoke that mounted to the sky.
अग्निर नो यज्ञम उप वेतु साधुयाग्निं नरो वि भरन्ते गर्हेगर्हे|	may agni graciously come to our sacrifice the men bear agni here and there in every house.
अग्निर दूतो अभवद धव्यवाहनो ऽगनिं वर्णाना वर्णते कविक्रतुम|	he hath become an envoy bearer of our gifts electing agni men choose one exceeding wise.
तुभ्येदम अग्ने मधुमत्तमं वचस तुभ्यम मनीषा इयम अस्तु शं हर्दे|	for thee o agni is this sweetest prayer of mine dear to thy spirit be this product of my thought.
तवां गिरः सिन्धुम इवावनीर महीर आ पर्णन्ति शवसा वर्धयन्ति च|	as great streams fill the river so our song of praise fill thee and make thee yet more mighty in thy strength.
तवाम अग्ने अङगिरसो गुहा हितम अन्व अविन्दञ छिश्रियाणं वने वने|	o agni the aṅgirases discovered thee what time thou layest hidden fleeing back from wood to wood.
स जायसे मथ्यमानः सहो महत तवाम आहुः सहसस पुत्रम अङगिरः|	thou by attrition art produced as conquering might and men o aṅgiras call thee the son of strength.
बर्हद वयो हि भानवे ऽरचा देवायाग्नये|	great power is in the beam of light sing praise to agni to the god.
यम मित्रं न परशस्तिभिर मर्तासो दधिरे पुरः|	whom men have set in foremost place like mitra with their eulogies.
स हि दयुभिर जनानां होता दक्षस्य बाह्वोः|	he by the splendour of his arms is priest of every able man.
वि हव्यम अग्निर आनुषग भगो न वारम रण्वति|	agni conveys oblation straight and deals as bhaga deals his boons.
अस्य सतोमे मघोनः सख्ये वर्द्धशोचिषः|	all rests upon the laud and love of him the rich highflaming god.
विश्वा यस्मिन तुविष्वणि सम अर्ये शुष्मम आदधुः|	on whom loudroaring men have laid great strength as on a faithful friend.
अधा हय अग्न एषां सुवीर्यस्य मंहना|	so agni be the friend of these with liberal gift of hero strength.
तम इद यह्वं न रोदसी परि शरवो बभूवतुः|	yea heaven and earth have not surpassed this youthful one in glorious fame.
नू न एहि वार्यम अग्ने गर्णान आ भर|	o agni quickly come to us and glorified bring precious wealth.
ये वयं ये च सूरयः सवस्ति धामहे सचोतैधि पर्त्सु नो वर्धे|	so we and these our princes will assemble for the good of all be near in fight to prosper us.
दयुतद्यामानम बर्हतीम रतेन रतावरीम अरुणप्सुं विभातीम|	the singers welcome with their hymns and praises the goddess dawn who bringeth in the sunlight.
देवीम उषसं सवर आवहन्तीम परति विप्रासो मतिभिर जरन्ते|	sublime by law true to eternal order bright on her path redtinted farrefulgent.
एषा जनं दर्शता बोधयन्ती सुगान पथः कर्ण्वती यात्य अग्रे|	she comes in front fair rousing up the people making the pathways easy to be travelled.
बर्हद्रथा बर्हती विश्वमिन्वोषा जयोतिर यछत्य अग्रे अह्नाम|	high on her lofty chariot allimpelling dawn gives her splendour at the days beginning.
एषा गोभिर अरुणेभिर युजानास्रेधन्ती रयिम अप्रायु चक्रे|	she harnessing her car with purple oxen injuring none hath brought perpetual riches.
पथो रदन्ती सुविताय देवी पुरुष्टुता विश्ववारा वि भाति|	opening paths to happiness the goddess shines praised by all giver of every blessing.
एषा वयेनी भवति दविबर्हा आविष्क्र्ण्वाना तन्वम पुरस्तात|	with changing tints she gleams in double splendour while from the eastward she displays her body.
रतस्य पन्थाम अन्व एति साधु परजानतीव न दिशो मिनाति|	she travels perfectly the path of order nor fails to reach as one who knows the quarters.
एषा शुभ्रा न तन्वो विदानोर्ध्वेव सनाती दर्शये नो अस्थात|	as conscious that her limbs are bright with bathing she stands as twere erect that we may see her.
अप दवेषो बाधमाना तमांस्य उषा दिवो दुहिता जयोतिषागात|	driving away malignity and darkness dawn child of heaven hath come to us with lustre.
एषा परतीची दुहिता दिवो नॄन योषेव भद्रा नि रिणीते अप्सः|	the daughter of the sky like some chaste woman bends opposite to men her forehead downward.
वयूर्ण्वती दाशुषे वार्याणि पुनर जयोतिर युवतिः पूर्वथाकः|	the maid disclosing boons to him who worships hath brought again the daylight as aforetime.
अग्ने तवं नो अन्तम उत तराता शिवो भवा वरूथ्यः|	o agni be our nearest friend be thou a kind deliverer and a gracious friend.
वसुर अग्निर वसुश्रवा अछा नक्षि दयुमत्तमं रयिं दाः|	excellent agni come thou nigh to us and give us wealth most splendidly renowned.
स नो बोधि शरुधी हवम उरुष्या णो अघायतः समस्मात|	so hear us listen to this call of ours and keep us far from every sinful man.
तं तवा शोचिष्ठ दीदिवः सुम्नाय नूनम ईमहे सखिभ्यः|	to thee then o most bright o radiant god we come with prayer for happiness for our friends.
विदा दिवो विष्यन्न अद्रिम उक्थैर आयत्या उषसो अर्चिनो गुः|	bards of approaching dawn who know the heavens are come with hymns to throw the mountain open.
अपाव्र्त वरजिनीर उत सवर गाद वि दुरो मानुषीर देव आवः|	the sun hath risen and oped the stable portals the doors of men too hath the god thrown open.
वि सूर्यो अमतिं न शरियं साद ओर्वाद गवाम माता जानती गात|	sūrya hath spread his light as splendour hither came the cows mother conscious from the stable.
धन्वर्णसो नद्यः खादोर्णा सथूणेव सुमिता दरंहत दयौः|	to streams that flow with biting waves to deserts and heaven is stablished like a firmset pillar.
अस्मा उक्थाय पर्वतस्य गर्भो महीनां जनुषे पूर्व्याय|	this laud hath won the burden of the mountain to aid the ancient birth of mighty waters.
वि पर्वतो जिहीत साधत दयौर आविवासन्तो दसयन्त भूम|	the mountain parted heaven performed his office the worshippers were worn with constant serving.
सूक्तेभिर वो वचोभिर देवजुष्टैर इन्द्रा नव अग्नी अवसे हुवध्यै|	with hymns and godloved words will i invoke you indra and agni to obtain your favour.
उक्थेभिर हि षमा कवयः सुयज्ञा आविवासन्तो मरुतो यजन्ति|	for verily sages skilled in sacrificing worship the maruts and with lauds invite them.
एतो नव अद्य सुध्यो भवाम पर दुछुना मिनवामा वरीयः|	this day approach us may our thoughts be holy far from us let us cast away misfortune.
आरे दवेषांसि सनुतर दधामायाम पराञ्चो यजमानम अछ|	let us keep those who hate us at a distance and haste to meet the man who sacrifices.
एता धियं कर्णवामा सखायो ऽप या मातां रणुत वरजं गोः|	come let us carry out o friends the purpose wherewith the mother threw the cows stall open.
यया मनुर विशिशिप्रं जिगाय यया वणिग वङकुर आपा पुरीषम|	that wherewith manu conquered visisipra wherewith the wandering merchant gained heavens water.
अनूनोद अत्र हस्तयतो अद्रिर आर्चन येन दश मासो नवग्वाः|	here urged by hands loudly hath rung the pressstone wherewith navagvas through ten months sang praises.
रतं यती सरमा गा अविन्दद विश्वानि सत्याङगिराश चकार|	saramā went aright and found the cattle aṅgiras gave effect to all their labours.
विश्वे अस्या वयुषि माहिनायाः सं यद गोभिर अङगिरसो नवन्त|	when at the dawning of this mighty goddess aṅgirases all sang forth with the cattle.
उत्स आसाम परमे सधस्थ रतस्य पथा सरमा विदद गाः|	their spring is in the loftiest place of meetingsaramā found the kine by orders pathway.
आ सूर्यो यातु सप्ताश्वः कषेत्रं यद अस्योर्विया दीर्घयाथे|	borne by his coursers seven may sūrya visit the field that spreadeth wide for his long journey.
रघुः शयेनः पतयद अन्धो अछा युवा कविर दीदयद गोषु गछन|	down on the soma swooped the rapid falcon bright was the young sage moving mid his cattle.
आ सूर्यो अरुहच छुक्रम अर्णो ऽयुक्त यद धरितो वीतप्र्ष्ठाः|	sūrya hath mounted to the shining ocean when he hath yoked his fairbacked tawny horses.
उद्ना न नावम अनयन्त धीरा आश्र्ण्वतीर आपो अर्वाग अतिष्ठन|	the wise have drawn him like a ship through water the floods obedient have descended hither.
धियं वो अप्सु दधिषे सवर्षां ययातरन दश मासो नवग्वाः|	i lay upon the floods your hymn lightwinning wherewith navagvas their ten months completed.
अया धिया सयाम देवगोपा अया धिया तुतुर्यामात्य अंहः|	through this our hymn may we have gods to guard us through this our hymn pass safe beyond affliction.
आ रुद्रास इन्द्रवन्तः सजोषसो हिरण्यरथाः सुविताय गन्तन|	of one accord with indra o ye rudras come borne on your golden car for our prosperity.
इयं वो अस्मत परति हर्यते मतिस तर्ष्णजे न दिव उत्सा उदन्यवे|	an offering from us this hymn is brought to you as unto one who th irsts for water heavenly springs.
वाशीमन्त रष्टिमन्तो मनीषिणः सुधन्वान इषुमन्तो निषङगिणः|	armed with your daggers full of wisdom armed with spears armed with your quivers armed with arrows with good bows.
सवश्वा सथ सुरथाः पर्श्निमातरः सवायुधा मरुतो याथना शुभम|	good horses and good cars have ye o pṛśnis sons ye maruts with good weapons go to victory.
धूनुथ दयाम पर्वतान दाशुषे वसु नि वो वना जिहते यामनो भिया|	from hills and heaven ye shake wealth for the worshipper in terror at your coming low the woods bow down.
कोपयथ पर्थिवीम पर्श्निमातरः शुभे यद उग्राः पर्षतीर अयुग्ध्वम|	ye make the earth to tremble sons of pṛśni when for victory ye have yoked fierce ones your spotted deer.
वातत्विषो मरुतो वर्षनिर्णिजो यमा इव सुसद्र्शः सुपेशसः|	bright with the blasts of wind wrapped in their robes of rain like twins of noble aspect and of lovely form.
पिशङगाश्वा अरुणाश्वा अरेपसः परत्वक्षसो महिना दयौर इवोरवः|	the maruts spotless with steeds tawnyhued and red strong in their mightiness and spreading wide like heaven.
पुरुद्रप्सा अञ्जिमन्तः सुदानवस तवेषसंद्र्शो अनवभ्रराधसः|	rich in adornment rich in drops munificent bright in their aspect yielding bounties that endure.
सुजातासो जनुषा रुक्मवक्षसो दिवो अर्का अम्र्तं नाम भेजिरे|	noble by birth adorned with gold upon their breasts the singers of the sky have won immortal fame.
रष्टयो वो मरुतो अंसयोर अधि सह ओजो बाह्वोर वो बलं हितम|	borne on both shoulders o ye maruts are your spears within your arms is laid your energy and trength.
नर्म्णा शीर्षस्व आयुधा रथेषु वो विश्वा वः शरीर अधि तनूषु पिपिशे|	bold thoughts are in your heads your weapons in your cars all glorious majesty is moulded on your forms.
गोमद अश्वावद रथवत सुवीरं चन्द्रवद राधो मरुतो ददा नः|	vouchsafe to us o maruts splendid bounty in cattle and in steeds in cars and heroes.
परशस्तिं नः कर्णुत रुद्रियासो भक्षीय वो ऽवसो दैव्यस्य|	children of rudra give us high distinction may i enjoy your godlike help and favour.
हये नरो मरुतो मर्ळता नस तुवीमघासो अम्र्ता रतज्ञाः|	ho maruts heroes skilled in law immortal be gracious unto us ye rich in treasures.
सत्यश्रुतः कवयो युवानो बर्हद्गिरयो बर्हद उक्षमाणाः|	ye hearers of the truth ye sage and youthful grown mighty dwelling on the lofty mountains.
सम भानुना यतते सूर्यस्याजुह्वानो घर्तप्र्ष्ठः सवञ्चाः|	bedewed with holy oil and meetly worshipped the swift one vies with sūryas beam in splendour.
तस्मा अम्र्ध्रा उषसो वय उछान य इन्द्राय सुनवामेत्य आह|	for him may mornings dawn without cessation who saith let us press soma out for indra.
समिद्धाग्निर वनवत सतीर्णबर्हिर युक्तग्रावा सुतसोमो जराते|	with kindled fire and strewn grass let him worship and somapresser sing with stones adjusted.
गरावाणो यस्येषिरं वदन्त्य अयद अध्वर्युर हविषाव सिन्धुम|	and let the priest whose pressstones ring forth loudly go down with his oblation to the river.
वधूर इयम पतिम इछन्त्य एति य ईं वहाते महिषीम इषिराम|	this wife is coming near who loves her husband who carries to his home a vigorous consort.
आस्य शरवस्याद रथ आ च घोषात पुरू सहस्रा परि वर्तयाते|	here may his car seek fame here loudly thunder and his wheel make a thousand revolutions.
न स राजा वयथते यस्मिन्न इन्द्रस तीव्रं सोमम पिबति गोसखायम|	no troubles vex that king in whose home indra drinks the sharp soma juice with milk commingled.
आ सत्वनैर अजति हन्ति वर्त्रं कषेति कषितीः सुभगो नाम पुष्यन|	with heroes he drives near he slays the foeman blest cherishing that name he guards his people.
पुष्यात कषेमे अभि योगे भवात्य उभे वर्तौ संयती सं जयाति|	may he support in peace and win in battle he masters both the hosts that meet together.
परियः सूर्ये परियो अग्ना भवाति य इन्द्राय सुतसोमो ददाशत|	dear shall he be to sūrya dear to agni who with pressed soma offers gifts to india.
तत सवितुर वर्णीमहे वयं देवस्य भोजनम|	we crave of savitar the god this treasure much to be enjoyed.
शरेष्ठं सर्वधातमं तुरम भगस्य धीमहि|	the best allyielding conquering gift of bhaga we would gladly win.
अस्य हि सवयशस्तरं सवितुः कच चन परियम|	savitars own supremacy most glorious and beloved of all.
न मिनन्ति सवराज्यम|	no one diminisheth in aught.
स हि रत्नानि दाशुषे सुवाति सविता भगः|	for savitar who is bhaga shall send riches to his worshipper.
तम भागं चित्रम ईमहे|	that wondrous portion we implore.
अद्या नो देव सवितः परजावत सावीः सौभगम|	send us this day god savitar prosperity with progeny.
परा दुष्वप्न्यं सुव|	drive thou the evil dream away.
विश्वानि देव सवितर दुरितानि परा सुव|	savitar god send far away all sorrows and calamities.
यद भद्रं तन न आ सुव|	and send us only what is good.
अनागसो अदितये देवस्य सवितुः सवे|	sinless in sight of aditi through the god savitars influence.
विश्वा वामानि धीमहि|	may we obtain all lovely things.
आ विश्वदेवं सत्पतिं सूक्तैर अद्या वर्णीमहे|	we with our hymns this day elect the general god lord of the good.
सत्यसवं सवितारम|	savitar whose decrees are true.
य इमे उभे अहनी पुर एत्य अप्रयुछन|	he who for ever vigilant precedes these twain the day and night.
सवाधीर देवः सविता|	is savitar the thoughtful god.
य इमा विश्वा जातान्य आश्रावयति शलोकेन|	he who gives glory unto all these living creatures with the song.
पर च सुवाति सविता|	and brings them forth is savitar.
अनस्वन्ता सत्पतिर मामहे मे गावा चेतिष्ठो असुरो मघोनः|	the godlike hero famousest of nobles hath granted me two oxen with a wagon.
तरैव्र्ष्णो अग्ने दशभिः सहस्रैर वैश्वानर तर्यरुणश चिकेत|	trvrsans son tryaruna hath distinguished himself vaiśvānara agni with ten thousands.
यो मे शता च विंशतिं च गोनां हरी च युक्ता सुधुरा ददाति|	protect tryaruna as thou art waxing strong and art highly praised vaiśvānara agni.
वैश्वानर सुष्टुतो वाव्र्धानो ऽगने यछ तर्यरुणाय शर्म|	who granteth me a hundred kine and twenty and two bay horses good at draught and harnessed.
एवा ते अग्ने सुमतिं चकानो नविष्ठाय नवमं तरसदस्युः|	so trasadasyu served thee god most youthful craving thy favour for the ninth time agni.
यो मे गिरस तुविजातस्य पूर्वीर युक्तेनाभि तर्यरुणो गर्णाति|	tryaruya who with attentive spirit accepteth many a song from me the mighty.
यो म इति परवोचत्य अश्वमेधाय सूरये|	he who declares his wish to me to asvamedha to the prince.
ददद रचा सनिं यते ददन मेधाम रतायते|	pays him who with his verse seeks gain gives power to him who keeps the law.
यस्य मा परुषाः शतम उद्धर्षयन्त्य उक्षणः|	from whom a hundred oxen all of speckled hue delight my heart.
अश्वमेधस्य दानाः सोमा इव तर्य्र्शिरः|	the gifts of asvamedha like thricemingled draughts of soma juice.
इन्द्राग्नी शतदाव्न्य अश्वमेधे सुवीर्यम|	to asvamedha who bestows a hundred gifts grant hero power.
कषत्रं धारयतम बर्हद दिवि सूर्यम इवाजरम|	o indraagni lofty rule like the unwasting sun in heaven.
तवाम अग्ने वसुपतिं वसूनाम अभि पर मन्दे अध्वरेषु राजन|	o agni king and lord of wealth and treasures in thee is my delight at sacrifices.
तवया वाजं वाजयन्तो जयेमाभि षयाम पर्त्सुतीर मर्त्यानाम|	through thee may we obtain the strength we long for and overcome the fierce attacks of mortals.
हव्यवाळ अग्निर अजरः पिता नो विभुर विभावा सुद्र्शीको अस्मे|	agni eternal father offeringbearer fair to behold farreaching farrefulgent.
सुगार्हपत्याः सम इषो दिदीह्य अस्मद्र्यक सम मिमीहि शरवांसि|	from wellkept household fire beam food to feed us and measure out to us abundant glory.
विशां कविं विश्पतिम मानुषीणां शुचिम पावकं घर्तप्र्ष्ठम अग्निम|	the sage of men the lord of human races pure purifying agni balmed with butter.
नि होतारं विश्वविदं दधिध्वे स देवेषु वनते वार्याणि|	him the omniscient as your priest ye stablish he wins among the gods things worth the choosing.
जुषस्वाग्न इळया सजोषा यतमानो रश्मिभिः सूर्यस्य|	agni enjoy of one accord with iḷā striving in rivalry with beams of sūrya.
जुषस्व नः समिधं जातवेद आ च देवान हविरद्याय वक्षि|	enjoy o jātavedas this our fuel and bring the gods to us to taste oblations.
जुष्टो दमूना अतिथिर दुरोण इमं नो यज्ञम उप याहि विद्वान|	as dear housefriend guest welcome in the dwelling to this our sacrifice come thou who knowest.
विश्वा अग्ने अभियुजो विहत्या शत्रूयताम आ भरा भोजनानि|	and agni having scattered all assailants bring to us the possessions of our foemen.
वधेन दस्युम पर हि चातयस्व वयः कर्ण्वानस तन्वे सवायै|	drive thou away the dasyu with thy weapon as gaining vital power for thine own body.
पिपर्षि यत सहसस पुत्र देवान्त सो अग्ने पाहि नर्तम वाजे अस्मान|	o son of strength the gods thou satisfiest so in fight save us most heroic agni.
वयं ते अग्न उक्थैर विधेम वयं हव्यैः पावक भद्रशोचे|	may we o agni with our lauds adore thee and with our gifts fairbeaming purifier.
अस्मे रयिं विश्ववारं सम इन्वास्मे विश्वानि दरविणानि धेहि|	send to us wealth containing all things precious bestow upon us every sort of riches.
अस्माकम अग्ने अध्वरं जुषस्व सहसः सूनो तरिषधस्थ हव्यम|	son of strength agni dweller in three regions accept our sacrifice and our oblation.
वयं देवेषु सुक्र्तः सयाम शर्मणा नस तरिवरूथेन पाहि|	among the gods may we be counted pious protect us with a triplyguarding shelter.
विश्वानि नो दुर्गहा जातवेदः सिन्धुं न नावा दुरिताति पर्षि|	over all woes and dangers jātavedas bear us as in a boat across a river.
अग्ने अत्रिवन नमसा गर्णानो ऽसमाकम बोध्य अविता तनूनाम|	praised with our homage even as atri praised thee o agni be the guardian of our bodies.
यस तवा हर्दा कीरिणा मन्यमानो ऽमर्त्यम मर्त्यो जोहवीमि|	as i remembering thee with grateful spirit a mortal call with might on thee immortal.
जातवेदो यशो अस्मासु धेहि परजाभिर अग्ने अम्र्तत्वम अश्याम|	vouchsafe us high renown o jātavedas and may i be immortal by my children.
यस्मै तवं सुक्र्ते जातवेद उलोकम अग्ने कर्णवः सयोनम|	the pious man o jātavedas agni to whom thou grantest ample room and pleasure.
अश्विनं स पुत्र्णं वीरवन्तं गोमन्तं रयिं नशते सवस्ति|	gaineth abundant wealth with sons and horses with heroes and with kine for his wellbeing.
पर शंतमा वरुणं दीधिती गीर मित्रम भगम अदितिं नूनम अश्याः|	now may our sweetest song with deep devotion reach varuṇa mitra aditi and bhaga.
पर्षद्योनिः पञ्चहोता शर्णोत्व अतूर्तपन्था असुरो मयोभुः|	may the five priests lord dwelling in oblations blissgiving asura hear whose paths are open.
परति मे सतोमम अदितिर जग्र्भ्यात सूनुं न माता हर्द्यं सुशेवम|	may aditi welcome even as a mother her dear heartgladdening son my song that lauds her.
बरह्म परियं देवहितं यद अस्त्य अहम मित्रे वरुणे यन मयोभु|	the prayer they love blissgiving godappointed i offer unto varuṇa and mitra.
उद ईरय कवितमं कवीनाम उनत्तैनम अभि मध्वा घर्तेन|	in spirit him the sagest of the sages with sacrificial oil and meath bedew him.
स नो वसूनि परयता हितानि चन्द्राणि देवः सविता सुवाति|	so then let him god savitar provide us excellent ready and resplendent treasures.
सम इन्द्र णो मनसा नेषि गोभिः सं सूरिभिर हरिवः सं सवस्ति|	with willing mind indra vouchsafe us cattle prosperity lord of bays and pious patrons.
सम बरह्मणा देवहितं यद अस्ति सं देवानां सुमत्या यज्ञियानाम|	and with the sacred prayer by gods appointed give us the holy deities lovingkindness.
देवो भगः सविता रायो अंश इन्द्रो वर्त्रस्य संजितो धनानाम|	god bhaga savitar who deals forth riches indra and they who conquer vṛtras treasures.
रभुक्षा वाज उत वा पुरंधिर अवन्तु नो अम्र्तासस तुरासः|	and vāja and Ṛbhukṣan and purandhi the mighty and immortal ones protect us.
मरुत्वतो अप्रतीतस्य जिष्णोर अजूर्यतः पर बरवामा कर्तानि|	let us declare his deeds the undecaying unrivalled victor whom the maruts follow.
न ते पूर्वे मघवन नापरासो न वीर्यं नूतनः कश चनाप|	none of old times o maghavan nor later none of these days hath reached thy hero prowess.
उप सतुहि परथमं रत्नधेयम बर्हस्पतिं सनितारं धनानाम|	praise him the chief who gives the boon of riches bṛhaspati distributor of treasures.
यः शंसते सतुवते शम्भविष्ठः पुरूवसुर आगमज जोहुवानम|	who blessing most the man who sings and praises comes with abundant wealth to his invoker.
तवोतिभिः सचमाना अरिष्टा बर्हस्पते मघवानः सुवीराः|	tended bṛhaspati with thy protections the princes are unharmed and girt by heroes.
ये अश्वदा उत वा सन्ति गोदा ये वस्त्रदाः सुभगास तेषु रायः|	wealth that brings bliss is found among the givers of horses and of cattle and of raiment.
विसर्माणं कर्णुहि वित्तम एषां ये भुञ्जते अप्र्णन्तो न उक्थैः|	make their wealth flee who through our hymns enjoying their riches yield us not an ample guerdon.
अपव्रतान परसवे वाव्र्धानान बरह्मद्विषः सूर्याद यावयस्व|	far from the sun keep those who hate devotion the godless prospering in their vocation.
य ओहते रक्षसो देववीताव अचक्रेभिस तम मरुतो नि यात|	with wheelless chariots drive down him o maruts who at the feasts of gods regards the demons.
यो वः शमीं शशमानस्य निन्दात तुछ्यान कामान करते सिष्विदानः|	may he though bathed in sweat form empty wishes who blames his sacred rite who toils to serve you.
तम उ षटुहि यः सविषुः सुधन्वा यो विश्वस्य कषयति भेषजस्य|	praise him whose bow is strong and sure his arrow him who is lord of every balm that bealeth.
यक्ष्वा महे सौमनसाय रुद्रं नमोभिर देवम असुरं दुवस्य|	worship thou rudra for his great good favour adore the asura god with salutations.
दमूनसो अपसो ये सुहस्ता वर्ष्णः पत्नीर नद्यो विभ्वतष्टाः|	may the housefriends the cunninghanded artists may the steers wives the streams carved out by vibhvan.
सरस्वती बर्हद्दिवोत राका दशस्यन्तीर वरिवस्यन्तु शुभ्राः|	and may the fair ones honour and befriend us sarasvatī brhaddiva and rākā.
पर सू महे सुशरणाय मेधां गिरम भरे नव्यसीं जायमानाम|	my newest song thought that now springs within me i offer to the great the sure protector.
य आहना दुहितुर वक्षणासु रूपा मिनानो अक्र्णोद इदं नः|	who made for us this all in fond love laying each varied form within his daughters bosom.
पर सुष्टुति सतनयन्तं रुवन्तम इळस पतिं जरितर नूनम अश्याः|	now even now may thy fair praise o singer attain idaspati who roars and thunders.
यो अब्दिमां उदनिमां इयर्ति पर विद्युता रोदसी उक्षमाणः|	who rich in clouds and waters with his lightning speeds forth bedewing both the earth and heaven.
एष सतोमो मारुतं शर्धो अछा रुद्रस्य सूनूंर युवन्यूंर उद अश्याः|	may this my laud attain the troop of maruts those who are youths in act the sons of rudra.
कामो राये हवते मा सवस्त्य उप सतुहि पर्षदश्वां अयासः|	the wish calls me to riches and wellbeing praise the unwearied ones whose steeds are dappled.
परैष सतोमः पर्थिवीम अन्तरिक्षं वनस्पतींर ओषधी राये अश्याः|	may this my laud reach earth and airs midregion and forest trees and plants to win me riches.
देवोदेवः सुहवो भूतु मह्यम मा नो माता पर्थिवी दुर्मतौ धात|	may every deity be swift to listen and mother earth with no ill thought regard me.
उरौ देवा अनिबाधे सयाम|	gods may we dwell in free untroubled bliss.
सम अश्विनोर अवसा नूतनेन मयोभुवा सुप्रणीती गमेम|	may we obtain the aśvins newest favour and gain their healthbestowing happy guidance.
आ नो रयिं वहतम ओत वीरान आ विश्वान्य अम्र्ता सौभगानि|	bring riches hither unto us and heroes and all felicity and joy immortals.
समिद्धो अग्निर दिवि शोचिर अश्रेत परत्यङङ उषसम उर्विया वि भाति|	agni inflamed hath sent to heaven his lustre he shines forth widely turning unto morning.
एति पराची विश्ववारा नमोभिर देवां ईळाना हविषा घर्ताची|	eastward the ladle goes that brings all blessing praising the godswith homage and oblation.
समिध्यमानो अम्र्तस्य राजसि हविष कर्ण्वन्तं सचसे सवस्तये|	enkindled thou art king of the immortal world him who brings offerings thou attendest for his weal.
विश्वं स धत्ते दरविणं यम इन्वस्य आतिथ्यम अग्ने नि च धत्त इत पुरः|	he whom thou urgest on makes all possessions his he sets before thee agni gifts that guests may claim.
अग्ने शर्ध महते सौभगाय तव दयुम्नान्य उत्तमानि सन्तु|	show thyself strong for mighty bliss o agni most excellent be thine effulgent splendours.
सं जास्पत्यं सुयमम आ कर्णुष्व शत्रूयताम अभि तिष्ठा महांसि|	make easy to maintain our household lordship and overcome the might of those who hate us.
समिद्धस्य परमहसो ऽगने वन्दे तव शरियम|	thy glory agni i adore kindled exalted in thy strength.
वर्षभो दयुम्नवां असि सम अध्वरेष्व इध्यसे|	a steer of brilliant splendour thou art lighted well at sacred rites.
समिद्धो अग्न आहुत देवान यक्षि सवध्वर|	agni invoked and kindled serve the gods thou skilled in sacrifice.
तवं हि हव्यवाळ असि|	for thou art bearer of our gifts.
आ जुहोता दुवस्यताग्निम परयत्य अध्वरे|	invoke and worship agni while the sacrificial rite proceeds.
वर्णीध्वं हव्यवाहनम|	for offeringbearer choose ye him.
इन्द्राग्नी यम अवथ उभा वाजेषु मर्त्यम|	the mortal man whom ye the twain indra and agni help in fight.
दर्ळ्हा चित स पर भेदति दयुम्ना वाणीर इव तरितः|	breaks through een stronglyguarded wealth as tṛta burst his way through reeds.
या पर्तनासु दुष्टरा या वाजेषु शरवाय्या|	the twain invincible in war worthy to be renowned in frays.
या पञ्च चर्षणीर अभॄन्द्राग्नी ता हवामहे|	lords of the fivefold people these indra and agni we invoke.
तयोर इद अमवच छवस तिग्मा दिद्युन मघोनोः|	impetuous is their strength and keen the lightning of the mighty pair.
परति दरुणा गभस्त्योर गवां वर्त्रघ्न एषते|	which from their arms speeds with the car to vṛtras slayer for the kine.
ता वाम एषे रथानाम इन्द्राग्नी हवामहे|	indra and agni we invoke you both as such to send your cars.
पती तुरस्य राधसो विद्वांसा गिर्वणस्तमा|	lords of quickcoming bounty ye who know chief lovers of the song.
ता वर्धन्ताव अनु दयून मर्ताय देवाव अदभा|	these who give increase day by day gods without guile for mortal man.
अर्हन्ता चित पुरो दधे ऽंशेव देवाव अर्वते|	worthy themselves i honour most two gods as partners for my horse.
एवेन्द्राग्निभ्याम अहावि हव्यं शूष्यं घर्तं न पूतम अद्रिभिः|	the strengthbestowing offering thus to indraagni hath been paid as butter purified by stones.
ता सूरिषु शरवो बर्हद रयिं गर्णत्सु दिध्र्तम इषं गर्णत्सु दिध्र्तम|	deal to our princes high renown deal wealth to those who sing your praise deal food to those who sing your praise.
आ धेनवः पयसा तूर्ण्यर्था अमर्धन्तीर उप नो यन्तु मध्वा|	may the milchcows who hasten to their object come harmless unto us with liquid sweetness.
महो राये बर्हतीः सप्त विप्रो मयोभुवो जरिता जोहवीति|	the singer lauding calls for ample riches the seven mighty ones who bring enjoyment.
आ सुष्टुती नमसा वर्तयध्यै दयावा वाजाय पर्थिवी अम्र्ध्रे|	with reverence and fair praise will i bring hither for sake of strength exhaustless earth and heaven.
पिता माता मधुवचाः सुहस्ता भरेभरे नो यशसाव अविष्टाम|	father and mother sweetof speech fairhanded may they farfamed in every fight protect us.
अध्वर्यवश चक्र्वांसो मधूनि पर वायवे भरत चारु शुक्रम|	adhvaryus make the sweet libations ready and bring the beautiful bright juice to vāyu.
होतेव नः परथमः पाह्य अस्य देव मध्वो ररिमा ते मदाय|	god as our priest be thou the first to drink it we give thee of the mead to make thee joyful.
दश कषिपो युञ्जते बाहू अद्रिं सोमस्य या शमितारा सुहस्ता|	two armsthe somas dexterous immo latorsand the ten fingers set and fix the pressstone.
मध्वो रसं सुगभस्तिर गिरिष्ठां चनिश्चदद दुदुहे शुक्रम अंशुः|	the stalk hath poured fair with its spreading branches the meads bright glittering juice that dwells on mountains.
असावि ते जुजुषाणाय सोमः करत्वे दक्षाय बर्हते मदाय|	the soma hath been pressed for thee its lover to give thee power and might and high enjoyment.
हरी रथे सुधुरा योगे अर्वाग इन्द्र परिया कर्णुहि हूयमानः|	invoked turn hither in thy car o indra at need thy two welltrained and dear bay horses.
आ नो महीम अरमतिं सजोषा गनां देवीं नमसा रातहव्याम|	bring by godtraversed paths accordant agni the great aramati celestial lady.
मधोर मदाय बर्हतीम रतज्ञाम आग्ने वह पथिभिर देवयानैः|	exalted worshipped with our gifts and homage who knoweth holy law to drink sweet soma.
अञ्जन्ति यम परथयन्तो न विप्रा वपावन्तं नाग्निना तपन्तः|	as on his fathers lap the son the darling so on the fire is set the sacred caldron.
पितुर न पुत्र उपसि परेष्ठ आ घर्मो अग्निम रतयन्न असादि|	which holy singers deck as if extending and heating that which holds the fatty membrane.
अछा मही बर्हती शंतमा गीर दूतो न गन्त्व अश्विना हुवध्यै|	hither as herald to invite the aśvins come the great lofty song most sweet and pleasant.
मयोभुवा सरथा यातम अर्वाग गन्तं निधिं धुरम आणिर न नाभिम|	come in one car joygivers to the banquet like the bolt binding pole and nave come hither.
पर तव्यसो नमक्तिं तुरस्याहम पूष्ण उत वायोर अदिक्षि|	i have declared this speech of adoration to mightiest pūṣan and victorious vāyu.
या राधसा चोदितारा मतीनां या वाजस्य दरविणोदा उत तमन|	who by their bounty are the hymns inspirers and of themselves give power as a possession.
आ नामभिर मरुतो वक्षि विश्वान आ रूपेभिर जातवेदो हुवानः|	invoked by us bring hither jatavedas the maruts all under their names and figures.
यज्ञं गिरो जरितुः सुष्टुतिं च विश्वे गन्त मरुतो विश्व ऊती|	come to the sacrifice with aid all maruts all to the songs and praises of the singer.
आ नो दिवो बर्हतः पर्वताद आ सरस्वती यजता गन्तु यज्ञम|	from high heaven may sarasvatī the holy visit our sacrifice and from the mountain.
हवं देवी जुजुषाणा घर्ताची शग्मां नो वाचम उशती शर्णोतु|	eager propitious may the balmy goddess hear our effectual speech our invocation.
आ वेधसं नीलप्र्ष्ठम बर्हन्तम बर्हस्पतिं सदने सादयध्वम|	set in his seat the god whose back is dusky bṛhaspati the lofty the disposer.
सादद्योनिं दम आ दीदिवांसं हिरण्यवर्णम अरुषं सपेम|	him let us worship set within the dwelling the red the goldenhued the allresplendent.
आ धर्णसिर बर्हद्दिवो रराणो विश्वेभिर गन्त्व ओमभिर हुवानः|	may the sustainer high in heaven come hither the bounteous one invoked with all his favours.
गना वसान ओषधीर अम्र्ध्रस तरिधातुश्र्ङगो वर्षभो वयोधाः|	dweller with dames divine with plants unwearied the steer with triple horn the lifebestower.
मातुष पदे परमे शुक्र आयोर विपन्यवो रास्पिरासो अग्मन|	the tuneful eloquent priests of him who liveth have sought the mothers bright and loftiest station.
सुशेव्यं नमसा रातहव्याः शिशुम मर्जन्त्य आयवो न वासे|	as living men with offered gifts and homage they deck the most auspicious child to clothe him.
बर्हद वयो बर्हते तुभ्यम अग्ने धियाजुरो मिथुनासः सचन्त|	agni great vital power is thine the mighty pairs waxing old in their devotion seek thee.
देवोदेवः सुहवो भूतु मह्यम मा नो माता पर्थिवी दुर्मतौ धात|	may every deity be swift to listen and mother earth with no ill thought regard me.
उरौ देवा अनिबाधे सयाम|	gods may we dwell in free untroubled bliss.
सम अश्विनोर अवसा नूतनेन मयोभुवा सुप्रणीती गमेम|	may we obtain the aśvins newest favour and gain their healthbestowing happy guidance.
आ नो रयिं वहतम ओत वीरान आ विश्वान्य अम्र्ता सौभगानि|	bring riches hither unto us and heroes and all felicity and joy immortals.
पराग्नये बर्हते यज्ञियाय रतस्य वर्ष्णे असुराय मन्म|	to agni lofty asura meet for worship steer of eternal law my prayer i offer.
घर्तं न यज्ञ आस्य सुपूतं गिरम भरे वर्षभाय परतीचीम|	i bring my song directed to the mighty like pure oil for his mouth at sacrifices.
रतं चिकित्व रतम इच चिकिद्ध्य रतस्य धारा अनु तर्न्धि पूर्वीः|	mark the law thou who knowest yea observe it send forth the full streams of eternal order.
नाहं यातुं सहसा न दवयेन रतं सपाम्य अरुषस्य वर्ष्णः|	i use no sorcery with might or falsehood the sacred law of the red steer i follow.
कया नो अग्न रतयन्न रतेन भुवो नवेदा उचथस्य नव्यः|	how hast thou follower of the law eternal become the knower of a new song agni.
वेदा मे देव रतुपा रतूनां नाहम पतिं सनितुर अस्य रायः|	the god the guardian of the seasons knows me the lord of him who won this wealth i know not.
के ते अग्ने रिपवे बन्धनासः के पायवः सनिषन्त दयुमन्तः|	who agni in alliance with thy foeman what splendid helpers won for them their riches.
के धासिम अग्ने अन्र्तस्य पान्ति क आसतो वचसः सन्ति गोपाः|	agni who guard the dwellingplace of falsehood who are protectors of the speech of liars.
सखायस ते विषुणा अग्न एते शिवासः सन्तो अशिवा अभूवन|	agni those friends of thine have turned them from thee gracious of old they have become ungracious.
अधूर्षत सवयम एते वचोभिर रजूयते वर्जिनानि बरुवन्तः|	they have deceived themselves by their own speeches uttering wicked words against the righteous.
यस ते अग्ने नमसा यज्ञम ईट्ट रतं स पात्य अरुषस्य वर्ष्णः|	he who pays sacrifice to thee with homage o agni keeps the red steers law eternal.
तस्य कषयः पर्थुर आ साधुर एतु परसर्स्राणस्य नहुषस्य शेषः|	wide is his dwelling may the noble offspring of nahuṣa who wandered forth come hither.
अग्ने पावक रोचिषा मन्द्रया देव जिह्वया|	o agni holy and divine with splendour and thy pleasant tongue.
आ देवान वक्षि यक्षि च|	bring hither and adore the gods.
तं तवा घर्तस्नव ईमहे चित्रभानो सवर्द्र्शम|	we pray thee thou who droppest oil brightrayed who lookest on the sun.
देवां आ वीतये वह|	bring the gods hither to the feast.
वीतिहोत्रं तवा कवे दयुमन्तं सम इधीमहि|	we have enkindled thee o sage bright caller of the gods to feast.
अग्ने बर्हन्तम अध्वरे|	o agni great in sacrifice.
अग्ने विश्वेभिर आ गहि देवेभिर हव्यदातये|	o agni come with all the gods come to our sacrificial gift.
होतारं तवा वर्णीमहे|	we choose thee as invoking priest.
यजमानाय सुन्वत आग्ने सुवीर्यं वह|	bring agni to the worshipper who pours the juice heroic strength.
देवैर आ सत्सि बर्हिषि|	sit with the gods upon the grass.
समिधानः सहस्रजिद अग्ने धर्माणि पुष्यसि|	victor of thousands agni thou enkindled cherishest the laws.
देवानां दूत उक्थ्यः|	laudworthy envoy of the gods.
नय अग्निं जातवेदसं होत्रवाहं यविष्ठ्यम|	set agni jātavedas down the bearer of our sacred gifts.
दधाता देवम रत्विजम|	mostyouthful god and minister.
पर यज्ञ एत्व आनुषग अद्या देवव्यचस्तमः|	duly proceed our sacrifice comprising all the gods today.
सत्र्णीत बर्हिर आसदे|	strew holy grass to be their seat.
एदम मरुतो अश्विना मित्रः सीदन्तु वरुणः|	so may the maruts sit thereon the aśvins mitra varuṇa.
देवासः सर्वया विशा|	the gods with all their company.
के षठा नरः शरेष्ठतमा य एकएक आयय|	o heroes lordliest of all who are ye that have singly come.
परमस्याः परावतः|	forth from a region most remote.
कव वो ऽशवाः कव्र्भीशवः कथं शेक कथा यय|	where are your horses where the reins how came ye how had ye the power.
पर्ष्ठे सदो नसोर यमः|	rein was on nose and seat on back.
जघने चोद एषां वि सक्थानि नरो यमुः|	the whip is laid upon the flank the heroes stretch their thighs apart.
पुत्रक्र्थे न जनयः|	like women when the babe is born.
परा वीरास एतन मर्यासो भद्रजानयः|	go ye o heroes far away ye bridegrooms with a lovely spouse.
अग्नितपो यथासथ|	that ye may warm you at the fire.
सनत साश्व्यम पशुम उत गव्यं शतावयम|	may she gain cattle for her meed hundreds of sheep and steeds and kine.
शयावाश्वस्तुताय या दोर वीरायोपबर्ब्र्हत|	who threw embracing arms around the hero whom gyavaiva praised.
उत तवा सत्री शशीयसी पुंसो भवति वस्यसी|	yea many a woman is more firm and better than the man who turns.
अदेवत्राद अराधसः|	away from gods andoffers not.
वि या जानाति जसुरिं वि तर्ष्यन्तं वि कामिनम|	she who discerns the weak and worn the man who thirsts and is in want.
देवत्रा कर्णुते मनः|	she sets her mind upon the gods.
उत घा नेमो अस्तुतः पुमां इति बरुवे पणिः|	and yet full many a one unpraised mean niggard is entitled man.
स वैरदेय इत समः|	only in weregild is he such.
उत मे ऽरपद युवतिर ममन्दुषी परति शयावाय वर्तनिम|	and she the young the joyousspirited divulged the path to Śyāva yea to me.
वि रोहिता पुरुमीळ्हाय येमतुर विप्राय दीर्घयशसे|	two red steeds carried me to purumīlhas side that sage of farextended fame.
यो मे धेनूनां शतं वैददश्विर यथा ददत|	him who like vaidadasvi like taranta hath bestowed on me.
तरन्त इव मंहना|	a hundred cows in liberal gift.
य ईं वहन्त आशुभिः पिबन्तो मदिरम मधु|	they who are borne by rapid steeds drinking the meath that gives delight.
अत्र शरवांसि दधिरे|	they have attained high glories here.
येषां शरियाधि रोदसी विभ्राजन्ते रथेष्व आ|	they by whose splendour both the worlds are overspread they shine on cars.
दिवि रुक्म इवोपरि|	as the gold gleams above in heaven.
युवा स मारुतो गणस तवेषरथो अनेद्यः|	that marut band is ever young borne on bright cars unblamable.
शुभंयावाप्रतिष्कुतः|	moving to victory checked by none.
को वेद नूनम एषां यत्रा मदन्ति धूतयः|	who knoweth verily of these where the allshakers take delight.
रतजाता अरेपसः|	born spotless after sacred law.
यूयम मर्तं विपन्यवः परणेतार इत्था धिया|	guides are ye lovers of the song to mortal man through holy hymn.
शरोतारो यामहूतिषु|	and hearers when he cries for help.
ते नो वसूनि काम्या पुरुश्चन्द्रा रिशादसः|	do ye destroyers of the foe worshipful and exceeding bright.
आ यज्ञियासो वव्र्त्तन|	send down the treasures that we crave.
एतम मे सतोमम ऊर्म्ये दार्भ्याय परा वह|	ourmya bear thou far away to darbhya this my hymn of praise.
गिरो देवि रथीर इव|	songs goddess as if chariotborne.
उत मे वोचताद इति सुतसोमे रथवीतौ|	from me to rathaviti say when he hath pressed the soma juice.
न कामो अप वेति मे|	the wish i had departeth not.
एष कषेति रथवीतिर मघवा गोमतीर अनु|	this wealthy rathaviti dwells among the people rich in kine.
पर्वतेष्व अपश्रितः|	among the mountains far withdrawn.
पर शर्धाय मारुताय सवभानव इमां वाचम अनजा पर्वतच्युते|	this hymn will i make for the marut host who bright in native splendour cast the mountains down.
घर्मस्तुभे दिव आ पर्ष्ठयज्वने दयुम्नश्रवसे महि नर्म्णम अर्चत|	sing the great strength of those illustrious in renown who stay the heat who sacrifice on heights of heaven.
पर वो मरुतस तविषा उदन्यवो वयोव्र्धो अश्वयुजः परिज्रयः|	o maruts rich in water strengtheners of life are your strong bands with harnessed steeds that wander far.
सं विद्युता दधति वाशति तरितः सवरन्त्य आपो ऽवना परिज्रयः|	trita roars out at him who aims the lightningflash the waters sweeping round are thundering on their way.
विद्युन्महसो नरो अश्मदिद्यवो वातत्विषो मरुतः पर्वतच्युतः|	they gleam with lightning heroes casters of the stone windrapid maruts overthrowers of the bills.
अब्दया चिन मुहुर आ हरादुनीव्र्त सतनयदमा रभसा उदोजसः|	oft through desire to rain coming with storm of hail roaring in onset violent and exceeding strong.
वय अक्तून रुद्रा वय अहानि शिक्वसो वय अन्तरिक्षं वि रजांसि धूतयः|	when mighty rudras through the nights and through the days when through the sky and realms of air shakers of all.
वि यद अज्रां अजथ नाव ईं यथा वि दुर्गाणि मरुतो नाह रिष्यथ|	when over the broad fields ye drive along like ships een to strongholds ye come maruts but are not harmed.
तद वीर्यं वो मरुतो महित्वनं दीर्घं ततान सूर्यो न योजनम|	maruts this hero strength and majesty of yours hath like the sun extended oer a lengthened way.
एता न यामे अग्र्भीतशोचिषो ऽनश्वदां यन नय अयातना गिरिम|	when in your course like deer with splendour unsubdued ye bowed the hill that gives imperishable rain.
अभ्राजि शर्धो मरुतो यद अर्णसम मोषथा वर्क्षं कपनेव वेधसः|	bright shone your host ye sages maruts when ye smote the waving tree as when the worm consumeth it.
अध समा नो अरमतिं सजोषसश चक्षुर इव यन्तम अनु नेषथा सुगम|	accordant as the eye guides him who walks have ye led our devotion onward by an easy path.
न स जीयते मरुतो न हन्यते न सरेधति न वयथते न रिष्यति|	never is he o maruts slain or overcome never doth he decay neer is distressed or harmed.
नास्य राय उप दस्यन्ति नोतय रषिं वा यं राजानं वा सुषूदथ|	his treasures his resources never waste away whom whether he be prince or Ṛṣi ye direct.
नियुत्वन्तो गरामजितो यथा नरो ऽरयमणो न मरुतः कबन्धिनः|	with harnessed team like heroes overcoming troops the friendly maruts laden with their watercasks.
पिन्वन्त्य उत्सं यद इनासो अस्वरन वय उन्दन्ति पर्थिवीम मध्वो अन्धसा|	let the spring flow and when impetuous they roar they inundate the earth with floods of pleasant meath.
परवत्वतीयम पर्थिवी मरुद्भ्यः परवत्वती दयौर भवति परयद्भ्यः|	free for the maruts is the earth with sloping ways free for the rushing ones is heaven with steep descents.
परवत्वतीः पथ्य्र अन्तरिक्ष्याः परवत्वन्तः पर्वता जीरदानवः|	the paths of airs midregion are precipitous precipitous the mountains with their running streams.
यन मरुतः सभरसः सवर्णरः सूर्य उदिते मदथा दिवो नरः|	when as the sun hath risen up ye take delight o bounteous radiant maruts heroes of the sky.
न वो ऽशवाः शरथयन्ताह सिस्रतः सद्यो अस्याध्वनः पारम अश्नुथ|	your coursers weary not when speeding onṭheir way and rapidly ye reach the end of this your path.
अंसेषु व रष्टयः पत्सु खादयो वक्षस्सु रुक्मा मरुतो रथे शुभः|	lances are on your shoulders anklets on your feet gold chains are on your breasts gems maruts on your car.
अग्निभ्राजसो विद्युतो गभस्त्योः शिप्राः शीर्षसु वितता हिरण्ययीः|	lightnings aglow with flame are flashing in your hands and visors wroughtof gold are laid upon your heads.
तं नाकम अर्यो अग्र्भीतशोचिषं रुशत पिप्पलम मरुतो वि धूनुथ|	maruts in eager stir ye shake the vault of heaven splendid beyond conception for its shining fruit.
सम अच्यन्त वर्जनातित्विषन्त यत सवरन्ति घोषं विततम रतायवः|	they gathered when they let their deeds of might flash forth the pious ones send forth a farresounding shout.
युष्मादत्तस्य मरुतो विचेतसो रायः सयाम रथ्यो वयस्वतः|	sage maruts may we be the drivers of the car of riches ful i of life that have been given by you.
न यो युछति तिष्यो यथा दिवो ऽसमे रारन्त मरुतः सहस्रिणम|	o maruts let that wealth in thousands dwell with us which never vanishes like tisya from the sky.
यूयं रयिम मरुत सपार्हवीरं यूयम रषिम अवथ सामविप्रम|	maruts ye further wealth with longedfor heroes further the Ṛṣi skilled in chanted verses.
यूयम अर्वन्तम भरताय वाजं यूयं धत्थ राजानं शरुष्टिमन्तम|	ye give the bhārata as his strength a charger and ye bestow a king who quickly listens.
तद वो यामि दरविणं सद्यूतयो येना सवर ण ततनाम नॄंर अभि|	of you most swift to succour i solicit wealth wherewith we may spread forth mid men like as the sun.
इदं सु मे मरुतो हर्यता वचो यस्य तरेम तरसा शतं हिमाः|	accept o maruts graciously this hymn of mine that we may live a hundred winters through its power.
अग्न ओजिष्ठम आ भर दयुम्नम अस्मभ्यम अध्रिगो|	bring us most mighty splendour thou agni resistless on thy way.
पर नो राया परीणसा रत्सि वाजाय पन्थाम|	with overflowing store of wealth mark out for us a path to strength.
तवं नो अग्ने अद्भुत करत्वा दक्षस्य मंहना|	ours art thou wondrous agni by wisdom and bounteousness of power.
तवे असुर्यम आरुहत कराणा मित्रो न यज्ञियः|	the might of asuras rests on thee like mitra worshipful in act.
तवं नो अग्न एषां गयम पुष्टिं च वर्धय|	agni increase our means of life increase the house and home of these.
ये सतोमेभिः पर सूरयो नरो मघान्य आनशुः|	the men the princes who have won great riches through our hymns of praise.
ये अग्ने चन्द्र ते गिरः शुम्भन्त्य अश्वराधसः|	bright agni they who deck their songs for thee have horses as their meed.
शुष्मेभिः शुष्मिणो नरो दिवश चिद येषाम बर्हत सुकीर्तिर बोधति तमना|	the men are mighty in their might they whose high laud as that of heaven awakes thee of its own accord.
तव तये अग्ने अर्चयो भराजन्तो यन्ति धर्ष्णुया|	o agni those resplendent flames of thine go valorously forth.
परिज्मानो न विद्युतः सवानो रथो न वाजयुः|	like lightnings flashing round us like a rattling car that seeks the spoil.
नू नो अग्न ऊतये सबाधसश च रातये|	now agni come to succour us let priests draw nigh to offer gifts.
अस्माकासश च सूरयो विश्वा आशास तरीषणि|	and let the patrons of our rites subdue all regions of the earth.
तवं नो अग्ने अङगिर सतुत सतवान आ भर|	bring to us agni aṅgiras lauded of old and lauded now.
होतर विभ्वासहं रयिं सतोत्र्भ्य सतवसे च न उतैधि पर्त्सु नो वर्धे|	invoker wealth to quell the strong that singers may extol thee be near us in fight for our success.
यस ते साधिष्ठो ऽवस इन्द्र करतुष टम आ भर|	indra for our assistance bring that most effectual power of thine.
अस्मभ्यं चर्षणीसहं सस्निं वाजेषु दुष्टरम|	which conquers men for us and wins the spoil invincible in fight.
यद इन्द्र ते चतस्रो यच छूर सन्ति तिस्रः|	indra whatever aids be thine four be they or o hero three.
यद वा पञ्च कषितीनाम अवस तत सु न आ भर|	or those of the five tribes of men bring quickly all that help to us.
आ ते ऽवो वरेण्यं वर्षन्तमस्य हूमहे|	the aid most excellent of thee the mightiest hitherward we call.
वर्षजूतिर हि जज्ञिष आभूभिर इन्द्र तुर्वणिः|	for thou wast born with hero might conquering indra with the strong.
वर्षा हय असि राधसे जज्ञिषे वर्ष्णि ते शवः|	mighty to prosper us wast thou born and mighty is the strength thou hast.
सवक्षत्रं ते धर्षन मनः सत्राहम इन्द्र पौंस्यम|	in native power thy soul is firm thy valour indra slays a host.
तवं तम इन्द्र मर्त्यम अमित्रयन्तम अद्रिवः|	o Śatakratu lord of strength o indra caster of the stone.
सर्वरथा शतक्रतो नि याहि शवसस पते|	with all thy chariots force assail the man who shows himself thy foe.
तवाम इद वर्त्रहन्तम जनासो वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	for mightiest vṛtraslayer thee fierce foremost among many folk.
उग्रम पूर्वीषु पूर्व्यं हवन्ते वाजसातये|	whose sacred grass is trimmed invite to battle where the spoil is won.
अस्माकम इन्द्र दुष्टरम पुरोयावानम आजिषु|	indra do thou protect our car that mingles foremost in the fights.
सयावानं धनेधने वाजयन्तम अवा रथम|	that bears its part in every fray invincible and seeking spoil.
अस्माकम इन्द्रेहि नो रथम अवा पुरंध्या|	come to us indra and protect our car with thine intelligence.
वयं शविष्ठ वार्यं दिवि शरवो दधीमहि दिवि सतोमम मनामहे|	may we o mightiest one obtain excellent fame at break of day and meditate our hymn at dawn.
आ यज्ञैर देव मर्त्य इत्था तव्यांसम ऊतये|	god may a mortal call the strong hither with solemn rites to aid.
अग्निं कर्ते सवध्वरे पूरुर ईळीतावसे|	a man call agni to protect when sacrifice is well prepared.
अस्य हि सवयशस्तर आसा विधर्मन मन्यसे|	near him thou seemest mightier still in native glory set to hold.
तं नाकं चित्रशोचिषम मन्द्रम परो मनीषया|	apart yon flamehued vault of heaven lovely beyond the thought of man.
अस्य वासा उ अर्चिषा य आयुक्त तुजा गिरा|	yea this is by the light of him whom powerful song hath bound to act.
दिवो न यस्य रेतसा बर्हच छोचन्त्य अर्चयः|	whose beams of splendour flash on high as though they sprang from heavenly seed.
अस्य करत्वा विचेतसो दस्मस्य वसु रथ आ|	wealth loads the wonderworkers car through his the very wise ones power.
अधा विश्वासु हव्यो ऽगनिर विक्षु पर शस्यते|	then meet to be invoked among all tribes is agni glorified.
नू न इद धि वार्यम आसा सचन्त सूरयः|	now too the princes shall obtain excellent riches by our lips.
ऊर्जो नपाद अभिष्टये पाहि शग्धि सवस्तय उतैधि पर्त्सु नो वर्धे|	protect us for our welfare lend thy succour o thou son of strength be near in fight to prosper us.
रतेन रतम अपिहितं धरुवं वां सूर्यस्य यत्र विमुचन्त्य अश्वान|	by your high law firm order is established there where they loose for travel sūryas horses.
दश शता सह तस्थुस तद एकं देवानां शरेष्ठं वपुषाम अपश्यम|	ten hundred stood together there i looked on this the most marvellous deities one chief glory.
तत सु वाम मित्रावरुणा महित्वम ईर्मा तस्थुषीर अहभिर दुदुह्रे|	this mitravaruṇa is your special greatness floods that stood there they with the days attracted.
विश्वाः पिन्वथः सवसरस्य धेना अनु वाम एकः पविर आ ववर्त|	ye cause to flow all voices of the cowpen your single chariotfelly hath rolled hither.
अधारयतम पर्थिवीम उत दयाम मित्रराजाना वरुणा महोभिः|	o mitravaruṇa ye by your greatness both kings have firmly stablished earth and heaven.
वर्धयतम ओषधीः पिन्वतं गा अव वर्ष्टिं सर्जतं जीरदानू|	ye caused the cows to stream the plants to flourish and scattering swift drops sent down the rainflood.
आ वाम अश्वासः सुयुजो वहन्तु यतरश्मय उप यन्त्व अर्वाक|	let your wellharnessed horses bear you hither hitherward let them come with reins drawn tightly.
घर्तस्य निर्णिग अनु वर्तते वाम उप सिन्धवः परदिवि कषरन्ति|	a covering cloud of sacred oil attends you and your streams flow to us from days aforetime.
अनु शरुताम अमतिं वर्धद उर्वीम बर्हिर इव यजुषा रक्षमाणा|	to make the lustre wider and more famous guarding the sacred grass with veneration.
नमस्वन्ता धर्तदक्षाधि गर्ते मित्रासाथे वरुणेळास्व अन्तः|	ye mitravaruṇa firm strong aweinspiring are seated on a throne amid oblations.
अक्रविहस्ता सुक्र्ते परस्पा यं तरासाथे वरुणेळास्व अन्तः|	with hands that shed no blood guarding the pious whom varuni3 ye save amid oblations.
राजाना कषत्रम अह्र्णीयमाना सहस्रस्थूणम बिभ्र्थः सह दवौ|	ye twain together kings of willing spirit uphold dominion based on thousand pillars.
हिरण्यनिर्णिग अयो अस्य सथूणा वि भराजते दिव्य अश्वाजनीव|	adorned with gold its columns are of iron in heaven it glitters like a whip for horses.
भद्रे कषेत्रे निमिता तिल्विले वा सनेम मध्वो अधिगर्त्यस्य|	or stablished on a field deepspoiled and fruitful so may we share the meath that loads your carseat.
हिरण्यरूपम उषसो वयुष्टाव अयस्थूणम उदिता सूर्यस्य|	ye mount your car goldhued at break of morning and ironpillared when the sun is setting.
आ रोहथो वरुण मित्र गर्तम अतश चक्षाथे अदितिं दितिं च|	and from that place o varuṇa and mitra behold infinity and limittion.
यद बंहिष्ठं नातिविधे सुदानू अछिद्रं शर्म भुवनस्य गोपा|	bountiful guardians of the world the shelter that is impenetrable strongest flawless.
तेन नो मित्रावरुणाव अविष्टं सिषासन्तो जिगीवांसः सयाम|	aid us with that o varuṇa and mitra and when we long to win may we be victors.
को वेद जानम एषां को वा पुरा सुम्नेष्व आस मरुताम|	who knows the birth of these or who lived in the maruts favour in the days of old.
यद युयुज्रे किलास्यः|	what time their spotted deer were yoked.
ऐतान रथेषु तस्थुषः कः शुश्राव कथा ययुः|	who when they stood upon their cars hath heard them tell the way they went.
कस्मै सस्रुः सुदासे अन्व आपय इळाभिर वर्ष्टयः सह|	who was the bounteous man to whom their kindred rains flowed down with food of sacrifice.
ते म आहुर य आययुर उप दयुभिर विभिर मदे|	to me they told it and they came with winged steeds radiant to the draught.
नरो मर्या अरेपस इमान पश्यन्न इति षटुहि|	youths heroes free from spot or stain behold us here and praise thou us.
ये अञ्जिषु ये वाशीषु सवभानवः सरक्षु रुक्मेषु खादिषु|	who shine selfluminous with ornaments and swords with breastplates armlets and with wreaths.
शराया रथेषु धन्वसु|	arrayed on chariots and with bows.
युष्माकं समा रथां अनु मुदे दधे मरुतो जीरदानवः|	o swift to pour your bounties down ye maruts with delight i look upon your cars.
वर्ष्टी दयावो यतीर इव|	like splendours coming through the rain.
आ यं नरः सुदानवो ददाशुषे दिवः कोशम अचुच्यवुः|	munificent heroes they have cast heavens treasury down for the worshippers behoof.
वि पर्जन्यं सर्जन्ति रोदसी अनु धन्वना यन्ति वर्ष्टयः|	they set the stormcloud free to stream through both the worlds and rainfloods flow oer desert spots.
तत्र्दानाः सिन्धवः कषोदसा रजः पर सस्रुर धेनवो यथा|	the bursting streams m billowy flood have spread abroad like milchkine oer the firmament.
सयन्ना अश्वा इवाध्वनो विमोचने वि यद वर्तन्त एन्यः|	like swift steeds hasting to their journeys restingplace to every side run glittering brooks.
आ यात मरुतो दिव आन्तरिक्षाद अमाद उत|	hither o maruts come from heaven from midair or from near at hand.
माव सथात परावतः|	tarry not far away from us.
मा वो रसानितभा कुभा करुमुर मा वः सिन्धुर नि रीरमत|	so let not rasā krumu or anitabha kubha or sindhu hold you back.
मा वः परि षठात सरयुः पुरीषिण्य अस्मे ईत सुम्नम अस्तु वः|	let not the watery sarayti obstruct your way with us be all the bliss ye give.
तं वः शर्धं रथानां तवेषं गणम मारुतं नव्यसीनाम|	that brilliant gathering of your cars the company of maruts of the youthful ones.
अनु पर यन्ति वर्ष्टयः|	the rainshowers speeding on attend.
शर्धंशर्धं व एषां वरातंवरातं गणंगणं सुशस्तिभिः|	with eulogies and hymns may we follow your army troop by troop and band by band.
अनु करामेम धीतिभिः|	and company by company.
कस्मा अद्य सुजाताय रातहव्याय पर ययुः|	to what oblationgiver sprung of noble ancestry have sped.
एना यामेन मरुतः|	the maruts on this course today.
येन तोकाय तनयाय धान्यम बीजं वहध्वे अक्षितम|	vouchsafe to us the bounty that which we implore through which for child and progeny.
अस्मभ्यं तद धत्तन यद व ईमहे राधो विश्वायु सौभगम|	ye give the seed of corn that wasteth not away and bliss that reacheth to all life.
अतीयाम निदस तिरः सवस्तिभिर हित्वावद्यम अरातीः|	may we in safety pass by those who slander us leaving behind disgrace and hate.
वर्ष्ट्वी शं योर आप उस्रि भेषजं सयाम मरुतः सह|	maruts may we be there when ye at dawn in rest and toil rain waters down and balm.
सुदेवः समहासति सुवीरो नरो मरुतः स मर्त्यः|	favoured by gods shall he the man o heroes marutr and possessed of noble sons.
यं तरायध्वे सयाम ते|	whom ye protect such may we be.
सतुहि भोजान सतुवतो अस्य यामनि रणन गावो न यवसे|	praise the freegivers at this liberal patrons rite they joy like cattle in the mead.
यतः पूर्वां इव सखींर अनु हवय गिरा गर्णीहि कामिनः|	so call thou unto them who come as ancient friends hymn those who love thee with a song.
रतस्य गोपाव अधि तिष्ठथो रथं सत्यधर्माणा परमे वयोमनि|	guardians of order ye whose laws are ever true in the sublimest heaven your chariot ye ascend.
यम अत्र मित्रावरुणावथो युवं तस्मै वर्ष्टिर मधुमत पिन्वते दिवः|	o mitravaruṇa whomsoeer ye favour here to him the rain with sweetness streameth down from heaven.
सम्राजाव अस्य भुवनस्य राजथो मित्रावरुणा विदथे सवर्द्र्शा|	this worlds imperial kings o mitravaruṇa ye rule in holy synod looking on the light.
वर्ष्टिं वां राधो अम्र्तत्वम ईमहे दयावाप्र्थिवी वि चरन्ति तन्यवः|	we pray for rain your boon and immortality through heaven and over earth the thunderers take their way.
सम्राजा उग्रा वर्षभा दिवस पती पर्थिव्या मित्रावरुणा विचर्षणी|	imperial kings strong heroes lords of earth and heaven mitra and varuṇa ye ever active ones.
चित्रेभिर अभ्रैर उप तिष्ठथो रवं दयां वर्षयथो असुरस्य मायया|	ye wait on thunder with the manytinted clouds and by the asuras magic power cause heaven to rain.
माया वाम मित्रावरुणा दिवि शरिता सूर्यो जयोतिश चरति चित्रम आयुधम|	your magic mitravaruṇa resteth in the heaven the sun the wondrous weapon cometh forth as light.
तम अभ्रेण वर्ष्ट्या गूहथो दिवि पर्जन्य दरप्सा मधुमन्त ईरते|	ye hide him in the sky with cloud and flood of rain and waterdrops parjanya full of sweetness flow.
रथं युञ्जते मरुतः शुभे सुखं शूरो न मित्रावरुणा गविष्टिषु|	the maruts yoke their easy car for victory o mitravaruṇa as a hero in the wars.
रजांसि चित्रा वि चरन्ति तन्यवो दिवः सम्राजा पयसा न उक्षतम|	the thunderers roam through regions varied in their hues imperial kings bedew us with the milk of heaven.
वाचं सु मित्रावरुणाव इरावतीम पर्जन्यश चित्रां वदति तविषीमतीम|	refreshing is your voice o mitravaruṇa parjanya sendeth out a wondrous mighty voice.
अभ्रा वसत मरुतः सु मायया दयां वर्षयतम अरुणाम अरेपसम|	with magic power the maruts clothe them with the clouds ye two cause heaven to rain the red the spotless one.
धर्मणा मित्रावरुणा विपश्चिता वरता रक्षेथे असुरस्य मायया|	wise with your law and through the asuras magic power ye guard the ordinances mitravaruṇa.
रतेन विश्वम भुवनं वि राजथः सूर्यम आ धत्थो दिवि चित्र्यं रथम|	ye by eternal order govern all the world ye set the sun in heaven as a refulgent car.
तरी रोचना वरुण तरींर उत दयून तरीणि मित्र धारयथो रजांसि|	three spheres of light o varuṇa three heavens three firmaments ye comprehend o mitra.
वाव्र्धानाव अमतिं कषत्रियस्यानु वरतं रक्षमाणाव अजुर्यम|	waxed strong ye keep the splendour of dominion guarding the ordinance that lasts for ever.
इरावतीर वरुण धेनवो वाम मधुमद वां सिन्धवो मित्र दुह्रे|	ye varuṇa have kine who yield refreshment mitra your floods pour water full of sweetness.
तरयस तस्थुर वर्षभासस तिस्र्णां धिषणानां रेतोधा वि दयुमन्तः|	there stand the three steers splendid in their brightness who fill the three worldbowls with genial moisture.
परातर देवीम अदितिं जोहवीमि मध्यंदिन उदिता सूर्यस्य|	i call at dawn on aditi the goddess i call at noon and when the sun is setting.
राये मित्रावरुणा सर्वतातेळे तोकाय तनयाय शं योः|	i pray o mitravaruṇa for safety for wealth and progeny in rest and trouble.
या धर्तारा रजसो रोचनस्योतादित्या दिव्या पार्थिवस्य|	ye who uphold the region sphere of brightness ye who support earths realm divine Ādityas.
न वां देवा अम्र्ता आ मिनन्ति वरतानि मित्रावरुणा धरुवाणि|	the immortal gods o varuṇa and mitra never impair your everlasting statutes.
कव सय वीरः को अपश्यद इन्द्रं सुखरथम ईयमानं हरिभ्याम|	where is that hero who hath looked on indra borne on lightrolling car by tawny coursers.
यो राया वज्री सुतसोमम इछन तद ओको गन्ता पुरुहूत ऊती|	who thunderer seeks with wealth the somapresser and to his house goes muchinvoked to aid him.
अवाचचक्षम पदम अस्य सस्वर उग्रं निधातुर अन्व आयम इछन|	i have beheld his strong and secret dwelling longing have sought the founders habitation.
अप्र्छम अन्यां उत ते म आहुर इन्द्रं नरो बुबुधाना अशेम|	i asked of others and they said in answer may we awakened men attain to indra.
पर नु वयं सुते या ते कर्तानीन्द्र बरवाम यानि नो जुजोषः|	we will tell indra when we pour libation what mighty deeds thou hast performed to please us.
वेदद अविद्वाञ छर्णवच च विद्वान वहते ऽयम मघवा सर्वसेनः|	let him who knows not learn who knows them listen hither rides maghavan with all his army.
सथिरम मनश चक्र्षे जात इन्द्र वेषीद एको युधये भूयसश चित|	indra when born thou madest firm thy spirit alone thou seekest war to fight with many.
अश्मानं चिच छवसा दिद्युतो वि विदो गवाम ऊर्वम उस्रियाणाम|	with might thou clavest een the rock asunder and foundest out the stable of the milchkine.
परो यत तवम परम आजनिष्ठाः परावति शरुत्यं नाम बिभ्रत|	when thou wast born supremest at a distance bearing a name renowned in faroff regions.
अतश चिद इन्द्राद अभयन्त देवा विश्वा अपो अजयद दासपत्नीः|	since then een gods have been afraid of indra he conquered all the floods which served the dāsa.
तुभ्येद एते मरुतः सुशेवा अर्चन्त्य अर्कं सुन्वन्त्य अन्धः|	these blissful maruts sing their psalm to praise thee and pour to thee libation of the soma.
अहिम ओहानम अप आशयानम पर मायाभिर मायिनं सक्षद इन्द्रः|	indra with wondrous powers subdued the dragon the guileful lurker who beset the waters.
वि षू मर्धो जनुषा दानम इन्वन्न अहन गवा मघवन संचकानः|	thou maghavan from the first didst scatter foemen speeding while joying in the milk the giver.
अत्रा दासस्य नमुचेः शिरो यद अवर्तयो मनवे गातुम इछन|	there seeking mans prosperity thou torest away the head of namuci the dāsa.
युजं हि माम अक्र्था आद इद इन्द्र शिरो दासस्य नमुचेर मथायन|	pounding the head of namuci the dāsa me too thou madest thine associate indra.
अश्मानं चित सवर्यं वर्तमानम पर चक्रियेव रोदसी मरुद्भ्यः|	yea and the rolling stone that is in heaven both worlds as on a car brought to the maruts.
सत्रियो हि दास आयुधानि चक्रे किम मा करन्न अबला अस्य सेनाः|	women for weapons hath the dāsa taken what injury can his feeble armies to me.
अन्तर हय अख्यद उभे अस्य धेने अथोप परैद युधये दस्युम इन्द्रः|	well he distinguished his two different voices and indra then advanced to fight the dasyu.
सम अत्र गावो ऽभितो ऽनवन्तेहेह वत्सैर वियुता यद आसन|	divided from their calves the cows went lowing around on every side hither and thither.
सं ता इन्द्रो अस्र्जद अस्य शाकैर यद ईं सोमासः सुषुता अमन्दन|	these indra reunited with his helpers what time the wellpressed soma made him joyful.
यद ईं सोमा बभ्रुधूता अमन्दन्न अरोरवीद वर्षभः सादनेषु|	what time the somas mixed by babhru cheered him loud the steer bellowed in his habitations.
पुरंदरः पपिवां इन्द्रो अस्य पुनर गवाम अददाद उस्रियाणाम|	so indra drank thereof the fortdestroyer and gave him guerdon in return of milchkine.
भद्रम इदं रुशमा अग्ने अक्रन गवां चत्वारि ददतः सहस्रा|	this good deed have the rusamas done agni that they have granted me four thousand cattle.
रणंचयस्य परयता मघानि परत्य अग्रभीष्म नर्तमस्य नर्णाम|	we have received rnancayas wealth of heroes the most heroic which was freely offered.
सुपेशसम माव सर्जन्त्य अस्तं गवां सहस्रै रुशमासो अग्ने|	the rusamas o agni sent me homeward with fair adornment and with kine in thousands.
तीव्रा इन्द्रम अममन्दुः सुतासो ऽकतोर वयुष्टौ परितक्म्यायाः|	the strong libations have made indra joyful when night whose course was ending changed to morning.
औछत सा रात्री परितक्म्या यां रणंचये राजनि रुशमानाम|	night wellnigh ended at rnancayas coming king of the rusamas was changed to morning.
अत्यो न वाजी रघुर अज्यमानो बभ्रुश चत्वार्य असनत सहस्रा|	like a strong courser fleet of foot urged onward babhru hath gained four thousand as his guerdon.
चतुःसहस्रं गव्यस्य पश्वः परत्य अग्रभीष्म रुशमेष्व अग्ने|	we have received four thousand head of cattle presented by the rusamas o agni.
घर्मश चित तप्तः परव्र्जे य आसीद अयस्मयस तं व आदाम विप्राः|	and we the singers have received the caldron of metal which was heated for pravargya.
बळ इत्था देव निष्क्र्तम आदित्या यजतम बर्हत|	ye gods Ādityas varuṇa aryaman mitra verily.
वरुण मित्रार्यमन वर्षिष्ठं कषत्रम आशाथे|	have here obtained supremest sway high holy set apart for you.
आ यद योनिं हिरण्ययं वरुण मित्र सदथः|	when varuṇa and mitra ye sit in your golden dwellingplace.
धर्तारा चर्षणीनां यन्तं सुम्नं रिशादसा|	ye twain supporters of mankind foeslayers give felicity.
विश्वे हि विश्ववेदसो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	all these possessors of all wealth varuṇa mitra aryaman.
वरता पदेव सश्चिरे पान्ति मर्त्यं रिषः|	follow their ways as if with feet and guard from injury mortal man.
ते हि सत्या रतस्प्र्श रतावानो जनेजने|	for they are true they cleave to law held holy among every race.
सुनीथासः सुदानवो ऽंहोश चिद उरुचक्रयः|	good leaders bounteous in their gifts deliverers even from distress.
को नु वाम मित्रास्तुतो वरुणो वा तनूनाम|	which of your persons varuṇa or mitra merits not our praise.
तत सु वाम एषते मतिर अत्रिभ्य एषते मतिः|	therefore our thought is turned to you the atris thought is turned to you.
को नु वाम मित्रावरुणाव रतायन दिवो वा महः पार्थिवस्य वा दे|	who mitravaruṇa is your pious servant to give you gifts from earth or mighty heaven.
रतस्य वा सदसि तरासीथां नो यज्ञायते वा पशुषो न वाजान|	preserve us in the seat of holy order and give the offerer power that winneth cattle.
ते नो मित्रो वरुणो अर्यमायुर इन्द्र रभुक्षा मरुतो जुषन्त|	may mitra varuṇa aryaman and Āyu indra Ṛbhukṣan and the maruts love us.
नमोभिर वा ये दधते सुव्र्क्तिं सतोमं रुद्राय मीळ्हुषे सजोषाः|	and they who of one mind with bounteous rudra accept the hymn and laud with adorations.
आ वां येष्ठाश्विना हुवध्यै वातस्य पत्मन रथ्यस्य पुष्टौ|	you will i call to feed the carhorse aśvins with the winds flight swiftest of those who travel.
उत वा दिवो असुराय मन्म परान्धांसीव यज्यवे भरध्वम|	or also to the asura of heaven worshipful bring a hymn as twere libation.
पर सक्षणो दिव्यः कण्वहोता तरितो दिवः सजोषा वातो अग्निः|	the heavenly victor he whose priest is kaṇva tṛta with dyaus accordant vāta agni.
पूषा भगः परभ्र्थे विश्वभोजा आजिं न जग्मुर आश्वश्वतमाः|	allfeeding pūṣan bhaga sought the oblation as they whose steeds are fleetest seek the contest.
पर वो रयिं युक्ताश्वम भरध्वं राय एषे ऽवसे दधीत धीः|	bring ye your riches forward borne on horses let thought be framed for help and gain of treasure.
सुशेव एवैर औशिजस्य होता ये व एवा मरुतस तुराणाम|	blest he the priest of auśija through courses the courses which are yours the fleet o maruts.
पर वो वायुं रथयुजं कर्णुध्वम पर देवं विप्रम पनितारम अर्कैः|	bring hither him who yokes the car your vāyu who praises with his songs the god and singer.
इषुध्यव रतसापः पुरंधीर वस्वीर नो अत्र पत्नीर आ धिये धुः|	and praying and devout noble and prudent may the gods spouses in their thoughts retain us.
उप व एषे वन्द्येभिः शूषैः पर यह्वी दिवश चितयद्भिर अर्कैः|	i speed to you with powers that should be honoured with songs distinguishing heavens mighty daughters.
उषासानक्ता विदुषीव विश्वम आ हा वहतो मर्त्याय यज्ञम|	morning and night the two as twere allknowing these bring the sacrifice unto the mortal.
अभि वो अर्चे पोष्यावतो नॄन वास्तोष पतिं तवष्टारं रराणः|	you i extol the nourishers of heroes bringing you gifts vastospati and tvaṣṭar.
धन्या सजोषा धिषणा नमोभिर वनस्पतींर ओषधी राय एषे|	rich dhiṣaṇā accords through our obeisance  andtrees and plants for the swift gain of riches.
तुजे नस तने पर्वताः सन्तु सवैतवो ये वसवो न वीराः|	ours be the parvatas even they for offspring freemoving who are heroes like the vasus.
पनित आप्त्यो यजतः सदा नो वर्धान नः शंसं नर्यो अभिष्टौ|	may holy Āptya friend of man exalted strengthen our word for ever and be near us.
वर्ष्णो अस्तोषि भूम्यस्य गर्भं तरितो नपातम अपां सुव्र्क्ति|	tṛta praised him germ of the earthly hero with pure songs him the offspring of the waters.
गर्णीते अग्निर एतरी न शूषैः शोचिष्केशो नि रिणाति वना|	agn with might neighs loudly like a charger he of the flaming hair destroys the forests.
कथा महे रुद्रियाय बरवाम कद राये चिकितुषे भगाय|	how shall we speak to the great might of rudra how speak to bhaga who takes thought for riches.
आप ओषधीर उत नो ऽवन्तु दयौर वना गिरयो वर्क्षकेशाः|	may plants the waters and the sky preserve us and woods and mountains with their trees for tresses.
शर्णोतु न ऊर्जाम पतिर गिरः स नभस तरीयां इषिरः परिज्मा|	may the swift wanderer lord of refreshments listen to our songs who speeds throuih cloudy heaven.
शर्ण्वन्त्व आपः पुरो न शुभ्राः परि सरुचो बब्र्हाणस्याद्रेः|	and may the waters bright like castles hear us as they flow onward from the cloven mountain.
विदा चिन नु महान्तो ये व एवा बरवाम दस्मा वार्यं दधानाः|	we know your ways ye mighty ones receiving choice meed ye wonderful we will proclaim it.
वयश चन सुभ्व आव यन्ति कषुभा मर्तम अनुयतं वधस्नैः|	even strong birds descend not to the mortal who strives to reach them with swift blow and weapons.
आ दैव्यानि पार्थिवानि जन्मापश चाछा सुमखाय वोचम|	celestial and terrestrial generations and waters will i summon to the feasting.
वर्धन्तां दयावो गिरश चन्द्राग्रा उदा वर्धन्ताम अभिषाता अर्णाः|	may days with bright dawns cause my songs to prosper and may the conquered streams increase their waters.
पदेपदे मे जरिमा नि धायि वरूत्री वा शक्रा या पायुभिश च|	duly to each one hath my laud been offered strong be varūtrī with her powers to succour.
सिषक्तु माता मही रसा नः समत सूरिभिर रजुहस्त रजुवनिः|	may the great mother rasā here befriend us straighthanded with the princes striving forward.
कथा दाशेम नमसा सुदानून एवया मरुतो अछोक्तौ परश्रवसो मरुतो अछोक्तौ|	how may we serve the liberal ones with worship the maruts swift of course in invocation the maruts farrenowned in invocation.
मा नो ऽहिर बुध्न्यो रिषे धाद अस्माकम भूद उपमातिवनिः|	let not the dragon of the deep annoy us and gladly may he welcome our addresses.
इति चिन नु परजायै पशुमत्यै देवासो वनते मर्त्यो व आ देवासो वनते मर्त्यो वः|	thus thinking o ye gods the mortal wins you to give him increase of his herds of cattle the mortal wins him o ye gods your favour.
अत्रा शिवां तन्वो धासिम अस्या जरां चिन मे निर्र्तिर जग्रसीत|	here he wins wholesome food to feed this body as for mine old age nirrti consume it.
तां वो देवाः सुमतिम ऊर्जयन्तीम इषम अश्याम वसवः शसा गोः|	o gods may we obtain from you this favour strengthening food through the cows praise ye vasus.
सा नः सुदानुर मर्ळयन्ती देवी परति दरवन्ती सुविताय गम्याः|	may she who gives good gifts the gracious goddes s come speeding nigh to us for our wellbeing.
अभि न इळा यूथस्य माता समन नदीभिर उर्वशी वा गर्णातु|	may iḷā mother of the herds of cattle and urvasi with all the streams accept us.
उर्वशी वा बर्हद्दिवा गर्णानाभ्यूर्ण्वाना परभ्र्थस्यायोः|	may urvasi in lofty heaven accepting as she partakes the oblation of the living.
सिषक्तु न ऊर्जव्यस्य पुष्टेः|	visit us while she shares urjavyas food.
अबोध्य अग्निः समिधा जनानाम परति धेनुम इवायतीम उषासम|	agni is wakened by the peoples fuel to meet the dawn who cometh like a milchcow.
यह्वा इव पर वयाम उज्जिहानाः पर भानवः सिस्रते नाकम अछ|	like young trees shooting up on high their branches his flames are rising to the vault of heaven.
अबोधि होता यजथाय देवान ऊर्ध्वो अग्निः सुमनाः परातर अस्थात|	for worship of the gods the priest was wakened at morning gracious agni hath arisen.
समिद्धस्य रुशद अदर्शि पाजो महान देवस तमसो निर अमोचि|	kindled his radiant might is made apparent and the great deity set free from darkness.
यद ईं गणस्य रशनाम अजीगः शुचिर अङकते शुचिभिर गोभिर अग्निः|	when he hath stirred the line of his attendants with the pure milk pure agni is anointed.
आद दक्षिणा युज्यते वाजयन्त्य उत्तानाम ऊर्ध्वो अधयज जुहूभिः|	the strengthbestowing gift is then made ready which spread in front with tongues erect he drinketh.
अग्निम अछा देवयताम मनांसि चक्षूंषीव सूर्ये सं चरन्ति|	the spirits of the pious turn together to agni as the eyes of all to sūrya.
यद ईं सुवाते उषसा विरूपे शवेतो वाजी जायते अग्रे अह्नाम|	he when both dawns of different hues have borne him springs up at daybreak as a strong white charger.
जनिष्ट हि जेन्यो अग्रे अह्नां हितो हितेष्व अरुषो वनेषु|	the noble one was born at days beginning laid red in colour mid the welllaid fuel.
दमेदमे सप्त रत्ना दधानो ऽगनिर होता नि षसादा यजीयान|	yielding in every house his seven rich treasures agni is seated priest most skilled in worship.
अग्निर होता नय असीदद यजीयान उपस्थे मातुः सुरभा उलोके|	agni hath sat him down a priest most skilful on a sweetsmelling place his mothers bosom.
युवा कविः पुरुनिष्ठ रतावा धर्ता कर्ष्टीनाम उत मध्य इद्धः|	young faithful sage preeminent oer many kindled among the folk whom he sustaineth.
पर णु तयं विप्रम अध्वरेषु साधुम अग्निं होतारम ईळते नमोभिः|	this singer excellent at sacrifices agni the priest they glorify with homage.
आ यस ततान रोदसी रतेन नित्यम मर्जन्ति वाजिनं घर्तेन|	him who spread out both worlds by law eternal they balm with oil strong steed who never faileth.
मार्जाल्यो मर्ज्यते सवे दमूनाः कविप्रशस्तो अतिथिः शिवो नः|	he worshipful housefriend in his home is worshipped our own auspicious guest lauded by sages.
सहस्रश्र्ङगो वर्षभस तदोजा विश्वां अग्ने सहसा परास्य अन्यान|	that strength the bull with thousand horns possesses in might o agni thou excellest others.
पर सद्यो अग्ने अत्य एष्य अन्यान आविर यस्मै चारुतमो बभूथ|	thou quickly passest by all others agni for him to whom thou hast appeared most lovely.
ईळेन्यो वपुष्यो विभावा परियो विशाम अतिथिर मानुषीणाम|	wondrously fair adorable effulgent the guest of men the darling of the people.
तुभ्यम भरन्ति कषितयो यविष्ठ बलिम अग्ने अन्तित ओत दूरात|	to thee most youthful god to thee o agni from near and far the people bring their tribute.
आ भन्दिष्ठस्य सुमतिं चिकिद्धि बर्हत ते अग्ने महि शर्म भद्रम|	mark well the prayer of him who best extols thee great high auspicious agni is thy shelter.
आद्य रथम भानुमो भानुमन्तम अग्ने तिष्ठ यजतेभिः समन्तम|	ascend today thy splendid car o agni in splendour with the holy ones around it.
विद्वान पथीनाम उर्व अन्तरिक्षम एह देवान हविरद्याय वक्षि|	knowing the paths by midairs spacious region bring hither gods to feast on our oblation.
अवोचाम कवये मेध्याय वचो वन्दारु वर्षभाय वर्ष्णे|	to him adorable sage strong and mighty we have sung forth our song of praise and homage.
गविष्ठिरो नमसा सतोमम अग्नौ दिव्ञ्व रुक्मम उरुव्यञ्चम अश्रेत|	gavisthira hath raised with prayer to agni this laud farreaching like gold light to heaven.
मनुष्वत तवा नि धीमहि मनुष्वत सम इधीमहि|	we stablish thee as manus used as manus used we kindle thee.
अग्ने मनुष्वद अङगिरो देवान देवयते यज|	like manus for the pious man  aṅgiras agni worship gods.
तवं हि मानुषे जने ऽगने सुप्रीत इध्यसे|	for well o agni art thou pleased when thou art kindled mid mankind.
सरुचस तवा यन्त्य आनुषक सुजात सर्पिरासुते|	straight go the ladles unto thee thou highborn god whose food is oil.
तवां विश्वे सजोषसो देवासो दूतम अक्रत|	thee have all gods of one accord established as their messenger.
सपर्यन्तस तवा कवे यज्ञेषु देवम ईळते|	serving at sacrifices men adore thee as a god o sage.
देवं वो देवयज्ययाग्निम ईळीत मर्त्यः|	let mortal man adore your god agni with worship due to gods.
समिद्धः शुक्र दीदिह्य रतस्य योनिम आसदः ससस्य योनिम आसदः|	shine forth enkindled radiant one sit in the chamber of the law sit in the chamber of the food.
यश चिकेत स सुक्रतुर देवत्रा स बरवीतु नः|	full wise is he who hath discerned let him speak to us of the gods.
वरुणो यस्य दर्शतो मित्रो वा वनते गिरः|	the man whose praisesongs varuṇa the beautiful or mitra loves.
ता हि शरेष्ठवर्चसा राजाना दीर्घश्रुत्तमा|	for they are kings of noblest might of glorious fame most widely spread.
ता सत्पती रताव्र्ध रतावाना जनेजने|	lords of the brave who strengthen law the holy ones with every race.
ता वाम इयानो ऽवसे पूर्वा उप बरुवे सचा|	approaching you with prayer for aid together i address you first.
सवश्वासः सु चेतुना वाजां अभि पर दावने|	we who have good steeds call on you most sage to give us strength besides.
मित्रो अंहोश चिद आद उरु कषयाय गातुं वनते|	een out of misery mitra gives a way to dwelling at our case.
मित्रस्य हि परतूर्वतः सुमतिर अस्ति विधतः|	for he who worships hath the grace of mitra fighter in the van.
वयम मित्रस्यावसि सयाम सप्रथस्तमे|	in mitras shelter that extends to utmost distance may we dwell.
अनेहसस तवोतयः सत्रा वरुणशेषसः|	unmenaced guarded by the care ever as sons of varuṇa.
युवम मित्रेमं जनं यतथः सं च नयथः|	ye mitra urge this people on and to one end direct their ways.
मा मघोनः परि खयतम मो अस्माकम रषीणां गोपीथे न उरुष्यतम|	neglect not ye the wealthy chiefs neglect not us the Ṛṣis be our guardians when ye quaff the milk.
विश्वो देवस्य नेतुर मर्तो वुरीत सख्यम|	let every mortal man elect the friendship of the guiding god.
विश्वो राय इषुध्यति दयुम्नं वर्णीत पुष्यसे|	each one solicits him for wealth and seeks renown to prosper him.
ते ते देव नेतर ये चेमां अनुशसे|	these leading god are thine and these here ready to speak after us.
ते राया ते हय रप्र्चे सचेमहि सचथ्यः|	as such may we attain to wealth and wait with services on thee.
अतो न आ नञ्न अतिथीन अतः पत्नीर दशस्यत|	so further honour as our guests the hero gods and then the dames.
आरे विश्वम पथेष्ठां दविषो युयोतु यूयुविः|	may he remove and keep afar our foes and all who block our path.
यत्र वह्निर अभिहितो दुद्रवद दरोण्यः पशुः|	where fire is set and swiftly runs the victim dwelling in the trough.
नर्मणा वीरपस्त्यो ऽरणा धीरेव सनिता|	he wins with heroes in his home friendly to man like constant streams.
एष ते देव नेता रथस्पतिः शं रयिः|	may these thy riches leader god that rule the car be blest to us.
शं राये शं सवस्तय इषस्तुतो मनामहे देवस्तुतो मनामहे|	yea blest to us for wealth and weal this will we ponder praising strength this ponder as we praise the god.
तर्य अर्यमा मनुषो देवताता तरी रोचना दिव्या धारयन्त|	mans worship of the gods hath three great lustres and three celestial lights have they established.
अर्चन्ति तवा मरुतः पूतदक्षास तवम एषाम रषिर इन्द्रासि धीरः|	the maruts gifted with pure strength adore thee for thou o indra art their sapient Ṛṣi.
अनु यद ईम मरुतो मन्दसानम आर्चन्न इन्द्रम पपिवांसं सुतस्य|	what time the maruts sang their song to indra joyous when he had drunk of soma juices.
आदत्त वज्रम अभि यद अहिं हन्न अपो यह्वीर अस्र्जत सर्तवा उ|	he grasped his thunderbolt to slay the dragon and loosed that they might flow the youthful waters.
उत बरह्माणो मरुतो मे अस्येन्द्रः सोमस्य सुषुतस्य पेयाः|	and o ye brahmans maruts so may indra drink draughts of this my carefully pressed soma.
तद धि हव्यम मनुषे गा अविन्दद अहन्न अहिम पपिवां इन्द्रो अस्य|	for this oblation found for man the cattle and indra having quaffed it slew the dragon.
आद रोदसी वितरं वि षकभायत संविव्यानश चिद भियसे मर्गं कः|	then heaven and earth he sundered and supported wrapped even in these he struck the beast with terror.
जिगर्तिम इन्द्रो अपजर्गुराणः परति शवसन्तम अव दानवं हन|	so indra forced the engulfer to disgorgement and slew the dānava panting against him.
अध करत्वा मघवन तुभ्यं देवा अनु विश्वे अददुः सोमपेयम|	thus all the gods o maghavan delivered to thee of their free will the draught of soma.
यत सूर्यस्य हरितः पतन्तीः पुरः सतीर उपरा एतशे कः|	when thou for etaśa didst cause to tarry the flying mares of sūrya racing forward.
नव यद अस्य नवतिं च भोगान साकं वज्रेण मघवा विव्र्श्चत|	when maghavan with the thunderbolt demolished his nineandninety castles all together.
अर्चन्तीन्द्रम मरुतः सधस्थे तरैष्टुभेन वचसा बाधत दयाम|	the maruts where they met glorified indra ye with the tṛṣṭup hymn obstructed heaven.
सखा सख्ये अपचत तूयम अग्निर अस्य करत्वा महिषा तरी शतानि|	as friend to aid a friend agni dressed quickly three hundred buffaloes even as he willed it.
तरी साकम इन्द्रो मनुषः सरांसि सुतम पिबद वर्त्रहत्याय सोमम|	and indra from mans gift for vṛtras slaughter drank ofr at once three lakes of pressedout soma.
तरी यच छता महिषाणाम अघो मास तरी सरांसि मघवा सोम्यापाः|	when thou three hundred buffaloes flesh hadst eaten and drunk as maghavan three lakes of soma.
कारं न विश्वे अह्वन्त देवा भरम इन्द्राय यद अहिं जघान|	all the gods raised as twere a shout of triumph to indra praise because he slew the dragon.
उशना यत सहस्यैर अयातं गर्हम इन्द्र जूजुवानेभिर अश्वैः|	what time ye came with strong steeds swiftly speeding o uśanā and indra to the dwelling.
वन्वानो अत्र सरथं ययाथ कुत्सेन देवैर अवनोर ह शुष्णम|	thou camest thither conquering together with kutsa and the gods thou slewest Śuṣṇa.
परान्यच चक्रम अव्र्हः सूर्यस्य कुत्सायान्यद वरिवो यातवे ऽकः|	one carwheel of the sun thou rolledst forward and one thou settest free to move for kutsa.
अनासो दस्यूंर अम्र्णो वधेन नि दुर्योण आव्र्णङ मर्ध्रवाचः|	thou slewest noseless dasyus with thy weapon and in their home oerthrewest hostile speakers.
सतोमासस तवा गौरिवीतेर अवर्धन्न अरन्धयो वैदथिनाय पिप्रुम|	the lauds of gauriviti made thee mighty to vidathins son as prey thou gavest pipru.
आ तवाम रजिश्वा सख्याय चक्रे पचन पक्तीर अपिबः सोमम अस्य|	rjisivan drew thee into friendship dressing the sacred food and thou hast drunk his soma.
नवग्वासः सुतसोमास इन्द्रं दशग्वासो अभ्य अर्चन्त्य अर्कैः|	navagvas and dasgvas with libations of soma juice sing hymns of praise to indra.
गव्यं चिद ऊर्वम अपिधानवन्तं तं चिन नरः शशमाना अप वरन|	labouring at their task the men laid open the stall of kine though firmly closed and fastened.
कथो नु ते परि चराणि विद्वान वीर्य्र मघवन या चकर्थ|	how shall i serve thee maghavan though knowing full well what hero deeds thou hast accomplished.
या चो नु नव्या कर्णवः शविष्ठ परेद उ ता ते विदथेषु बरवाम|	and the fresh deeds which thou wilt do most mighty these too will we tell forth in sacred synods.
एता विश्वा चक्र्वां इन्द्र भूर्य अपरीतो जनुषा वीर्येण|	resistless from of old through hero courage thou hast done all these many acts o indra.
या चिन नु वज्रिन कर्णवो दध्र्ष्वान न ते वर्ता तविष्या अस्ति तस्याः|	what thou wilt do in bravery thunderwielder none is there who may hinder this thy prowess.
इन्द्र बरह्म करियमाणा जुषस्व या ते शविष्ठ नव्या अकर्म|	indra accept the prayers which now are offered accept the new prayers mightiest which we utter.
वस्त्रेव भद्रा सुक्र्ता वसूयू रथं न धीरः सवपा अतक्षम|	like fair and wellmade robes i seeking riches as a deft craftsman makes a car have wrought them.
यम अग्ने वाजसातम तवं चिन मन्यसे रयिम|	agni best winner of the spoil cause us to praise before the gods.
तं नो गीर्भिः शरवाय्यं देवत्रा पनया युजम|	as our associate meet for lauds wealth which thou verily deemest wealth.
ये अग्ने नेरयन्ति ते वर्द्धा उग्रस्य शवसः|	agni the great who ward not off the anger of thy power and might.
अप दवेषो अप हवरो ऽनयव्रतस्य सश्चिरे|	stir up the wrath and hatred due to one who holds an alien creed.
होतारं तवा वर्णीमहे ऽगने दक्षस्य साधनम|	thee agni would we choose as priest the perfecter of strength and skill.
यज्ञेषु पूर्व्यं गिरा परयस्वन्तो हवामहे|	we who bring sacred food invoke with song thee chief at holy rites.
इत्था यथा त ऊतये सहसावन दिवेदिवे|	here as is needful for thine aid we toil o conqueror day by day.
राय रताय सुक्रतो गोभिः षयाम सधमादो वीरैः सयाम सधमादः|	for wealth for law may we rejoice most wise one at the feast with kine rejoice with heroes at the feast.
स आ गमद इन्द्रो यो वसूनां चिकेतद दातुं दामनो रयीणाम|	may indra come to us he who knows rightly to give forth treasures from his store of riches.
धन्वचरो न वंसगस तर्षाणश चकमानः पिबतु दुग्धम अंशुम|	even as a thirsty steer who roams the deserts may he drink eagerly the milkedout soma.
आ ते हनू हरिवः शूर शिप्रे रुहत सोमो न पर्वतस्य पर्ष्ठे|	lord of bay horses hero may the soma rise to thy cheeks and jaws like mountainridges.
अनु तवा राजन्न अर्वतो न हिन्वन गीर्भिर मदेम पुरुहूत विश्वे|	may we o king as he who driveth coursers all joy in thee with hymns invoked of many.
चक्रं न वर्त्तम पुरुहूत वेपते मनो भिया मे अमतेर इद अद्रिवः|	invoked of many caster of the stone my heart quakes like a rolling wheel for fear of penury.
रथाद अधि तवा जरिता सदाव्र्ध कुविन नु सतोषन मघवन पुरूवसुः|	shall not puruvasu the singer give thee praise o everprospering maghavan mounted on thy car.
एष गरावेव जरिता त इन्द्रेयर्ति वाचम बर्हद आशुषाणः|	like the pressstone is this thy praiser indra loudly he lifts his voice with strong endeavour.
पर सव्येन मघवन यंसि रायः पर दक्षिणिद धरिवो मा वि वेनः|	with thy left hand o maghavan give us riches with thy right lord of bays be not reluctant.
वर्षा तवा वर्षणं वर्धतु दयौर वर्षा वर्षभ्यां वहसे हरिभ्याम|	may the strong heaven make thee the strong wax stronger strong thou art borne by thy two strong bay horses.
स नो वर्षा वर्षरथः सुशिप्र वर्षक्रतो वर्षा वज्रिन भरे धाः|	so fair of cheek with mighty chariot mighty uphold us strongwilled thunderarmed in battle.
यो रोहितौ वाजिनौ वाजिनीवान तरिभिः शतैः सचमानाव अदिष्ट|	maruts let all the people in obeisance bow down before this youthful srutaratha.
यूने सम अस्मै कषितयो नमन्तां शरुतरथाय मरुतो दुवोया|	who rich in steeds gave me two dark red horses together with three hundred head of cattle.
देवं वो अद्य सवितारम एषे भगं च रत्नं विभजन्तम आयोः|	this day i bring god savitar to meet you and bhaga who allots the wealth of mortals.
आ वां नरा पुरुभुजा वव्र्त्यां दिवेदिवे चिद अश्विना सखीयन|	you aśvins heroes rich in treasures daily seeking your friendship fain would i turn hither.
परति परयाणम असुरस्य विद्वान सूक्तैर देवं सवितारं दुवस्य|	knowing full well the asuras time of coming worship god savitar with hymns and praises.
उप बरुवीत नमसा विजानञ जयेष्ठं च रत्नं विभजन्तम आयोः|	let him who rightly knoweth speak with homage to him who dealeth out mans noblest treasure.
अदत्रया दयते वार्याणि पूषा भगो अदितिर वस्त उस्रः|	not for reward doth pūṣan send his blessings bhaga or aditi his garb is splendour.
इन्द्रो विष्णुर वरुणो मित्रो अग्निर अहानि भद्रा जनयन्त दस्माः|	may indra visniu varuṇa mitra agni produce auspicious days the wonderworkers.
तन नो अनर्वा सविता वरूथं तत सिन्धव इषयन्तो अनु गमन|	sending the shelter which we ask the foeless savitar and the rivers shall approach us.
उप यद वोचे अध्वरस्य होता रायः सयाम पतयो वाजरत्नाः|	when i the sacrifices priest invite them may we he lords of wealth and rich possessions.
पर ये वसुभ्य ईवद आ नमो दुर ये मित्रे वरुणे सूक्तवाचः|	they who devote such worship to the vasus singing their hymns to varuṇa and mitra.
अवैत्व अभ्वं कर्णुता वरीयो दिवस्प्र्थिव्योर अवसा मदेम|	vouchsafe them ample room far off be danger through grace of heaven and earth may we be happy.
परयुञ्जती दिव एति बरुवाणा मही माता दुहितुर बोधयन्ती|	urging to toil and making proclamation seeking heavens daughter comes the mighty mother.
आविवासन्ती युवतिर मनीषा पित्र्भ्य आ सदने जोहुवाना|	she comes the youthful hymn unto the fathers inviting to her home and loudly calling.
अजिरासस तदप ईयमाना आतस्थिवांसो अम्र्तस्य नाभिम|	swift in their motion hasting to their duty reaching the central point of life immortal.
अनन्तास उरवो विश्वतः सीम परि दयावाप्र्थिवी यन्ति पन्थाः|	on every side about the earth and heaven go forth the spacious paths without a limit.
उक्षा समुद्रो अरुषः सुपर्णः पूर्वस्य योनिम पितुर आ विवेश|	steer sea red bird with strong wings he hath entered the dwellingplace of the primeval father.
मध्ये दिवो निहितः पर्श्निर अश्मा वि चक्रमे रजसस पात्य अन्तौ|	a gayhued stone set in the midst of heaven he hath gone forth and guards midairs two limits.
चत्वार ईम बिभ्रति कषेमयन्तो दश गर्भं चरसे धापयन्ते|	four bear him up and give him rest and quiet and ten invigorate the babe for travel.
तरिधातवः परमा अस्य गावो दिवश चरन्ति परि सद्यो अन्तान|	his kine most excellent of threefold nature pass swiftly round the boundaries of heaven.
इदं वपुर निवचनं जनासश चरन्ति यन नद्यस तस्थुर आपः|	wondrous o people is the mystic knowledge that while the waters stand the streams are flowing.
दवे यद ईम बिभ्र्तो मातुर अन्ये इहेह जाते यम्य्र सबन्धू|	that separate from his mother two support him closelyunited twins here made apparent.
वि तन्वते धियो अस्मा अपांसि वस्त्रा पुत्राय मातरो वयन्ति|	for him they lenghten prayers and acts of worship the mothers weave garments for him their offspring.
उपप्रक्षे वर्षणो मोदमाना दिवस पथा वध्वो यन्त्य अछ|	rejoicing for the steers impregning contact his spouses move on paths or heaven to meet him.
तद अस्तु मित्रावरुणा तद अग्ने शं योर अस्मभ्यम इदम अस्तु शस्तम|	be this our praise o varuṇa and mitra may this be health and force to us o agni.
अशीमहि गाधम उत परतिष्ठां नमो दिवे बर्हते सादनाय|	may we obtain firm ground and room for resting glory to heaven the lofty habitation.
परति परियतमं रथं वर्षणं वसुवाहनम|	to meet your treasurebringing car the mighty car most dear to us.
सतोता वाम अश्विनाव रषि सतोमेन परति भूषति माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	aśvins the Ṛṣi is prepared your raiser with his song of praise lovers of sweetness hear my call.
अत्यायातम अश्विना तिरो विश्वा अहं सना|	pass o ye aśvins pass away beyond all tribes of selfish men.
दस्रा हिरण्यवर्तनी सुषुम्ना सिन्धुवाहसा माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	wonderful with your golden paths most gracious bringers of the flood lovers of sweetness hear my call.
आ नो रत्नानि बिभ्रताव अश्विना गछतं युवम|	come to us o ye aśvin pair bringing your precious treasures come.
रुद्रा हिरण्यवर्तनी जुषाणा वाजिनीवसू माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	ye rudras on your paths of gold rejoicing rich in store of wealth lovers of sweetness hear my call.
सुष्टुभो वां वर्षण्वसू रथे वाणीच्य आहिता|	o strong and good the voice of him who lauds you well cleaves to your car.
उत वां ककुहो मर्गः पर्क्षः कर्णोति वापुषो माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	and that great beast your chariotsteed fair wonderful makes dainty food lovers of sweetness hear my call.
बोधिन्मनसा रथ्येषिरा हवनश्रुता|	watchful in spirit born on cars impetuous listing to his cry.
विभिश चयवानम अश्विना नि याथो अद्वयाविनम माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	aśvins with winged steeds ye speed down to cyavana void of guile lovers of sweetness hear my call.
आ वां नरा मनोयुजो ऽशवासः परुषितप्सवः|	hither o heroes let your steeds of dappled hue yoked at the thought.
वयो वहन्तु पीतये सह सुम्नेभिर अश्विना माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	your flying steeds o aśvins bring you hitherward with bliss to drink lovers of sweetness hear my call.
अश्विनाव एह गछतं नासत्या मा वि वेनतम|	o aśvins hither come to us nāsatyas be not disinclined.
तिरश चिद अर्यया परि वर्तिर यातम अदाभ्या माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	through longing for the pious turn out of the way to reach our home lovers of sweetness bear my call.
अस्मिन यज्ञे अदाभ्या जरितारं शुभस पती|	ye lords of splendour free from guile come stand at this our sacrifice.
अवस्युम अश्विना युवं गर्णन्तम उप भूषथो माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	beside the singer aśvins who longs for your grace and lauds you both lovers of sweetness hear my call.
अभूद उषा रुशत्पशुर आग्निर अधाय्य रत्वियः|	dawn with her white herd hath appeared and in due time hath fire been placed.
अयोजि वां वर्षण्वसू रथो दस्राव अमर्त्यो माध्वी मम शरुतं हवम|	harnessed is your immortal car o wonderworkers strong and kind lovers of sweetness bear my call.
अर्चन्तस तवा हवामहे ऽरचन्तः सम इधीमहि|	with songs of praise we call on thee we kindle thee with songs of praise.
अग्ने अर्चन्त ऊतये|	agni with songs of praise for help.
अग्ने सतोमम मनामहे सिध्रम अद्य दिविस्प्र्शः|	eager for wealth we meditate agnis effectual praise today.
देवस्य दरविणस्यवः|	praise of the god who touches heaven.
अग्निर जुषत नो गिरो होता यो मानुषेष्व आ|	may agni priest among mankind take pleasure in our songs of praise.
स यक्षद दैव्यं जनम|	and worship the celestial folk.
तवम अग्ने सप्रथा असि जुष्टो होता वरेण्यः|	thou agni art spread widely forth priest dear and excellent through thee.
तवया यज्ञं वि तन्वते|	men make the sacrifice complete.
तवाम अग्ने वाजसातमं विप्रा वर्धन्ति सुष्टुतम|	singers exalt thee agni well lauded best giver of our strength.
स नो रास्व सुवीर्यम|	so grant thou us heroic might.
अग्ने नेमिर अरां इव देवांस तवम परिभूर असि|	thou agni as the felly rings the spokes encompassest the gods.
आ राधश चित्रम रञ्जसे|	i yearn for bounty manifold.
उरोष ट इन्द्र राधसो विभ्वी रातिः शतक्रतो|	wide indra Śatakratu spreads the bounty of thine ample grace.
अधा नो विश्वचर्षणे दयुम्ना सुक्षत्र मंहय|	so lord of fair dominion friend of all men give us splendid wealth.
यद ईम इन्द्र शरवाय्यम इषं शविष्ठ दधिषे|	the food which mightiest indra thou possessest worthy of renown.
पप्रथे दीर्घश्रुत्तमं हिरण्यवर्ण दुष्टरम|	is bruited as most widely famed invincible o goldenhued.
शुष्मासो ये ते अद्रिवो मेहना केतसापः|	o darter of the stone the powers which readily obey thy will.
उभा देवाव अभिष्टये दिवश च गमश च राजथः|	divinities both thou and they ye rule to guard them earth and heaven.
उतो नो अस्य कस्य चिद दक्षस्य तव वर्त्रहन|	and from whatever power of thine o vṛtraslayer it may be.
अस्मभ्यं नर्म्णम आ भरास्मभ्यं नर्मणस्यसे|	bring thou to us heroic strength thou hast a mans regard for us.
नू त आभिर अभिष्टिभिस तव शर्मञ छतक्रतो|	in thy protection with these aids of thine o lord of hundred powers.
इन्द्र सयाम सुगोपाः शूर सयाम सुगोपाः|	indra may we be guarded well hero may we be guarded well.
परातर अग्निः पुरुप्रियो विश सतवेतातिथिः|	at dawn let agni muchbeloved guest of the house be glorified.
विश्वानि यो अमर्त्यो हव्या मर्तेषु रण्यति|	immortal who delights in all oblations brought by mortal men.
दविताय मर्क्तवाहसे सवस्य दक्षस्य मंहना|	for dvita who receives through wealth of native strength maimed offerings.
इन्दुं स धत्त आनुषक सतोता चित ते अमर्त्य|	thy praiser even gains at once the somadrops immortal gods.
तं वो दीर्घायुशोचिषं गिरा हुवे मघोनाम|	nobles with song i call that car of yours that shines with lengthened life.
अरिष्टो येषां रथो वय अश्वदावन्न ईयते|	for god who givest steeds that car hither and thither goes unharmed.
चित्रा वा येषु दीधितिर आसन्न उक्था पान्ति ये|	they who have varied ways of thought who guard the lauds within their lips.
सतीर्णम बर्हिः सवर्णरे शरवांसि दधिरे परि|	and strew the grass before the light have decked themselves with high renown.
ये मे पञ्चाशतं ददुर अश्वानां सधस्तुति|	immortal agni give the chiefs heroes who institute the rite.
दयुमद अग्ने महि शरवो बर्हत कर्धि मघोनां नर्वद अम्र्त नर्णाम|	heroes illustrious lofty fame who at the synod met for praise presented me with fifty steeds.
बळ इत्था पर्वतानां खिद्रम बिभर्षि पर्थिवि|	thou of a trutho prthivi bearest the tool that rends the hills.
पर या भूमिम परवत्वति मह्ना जिनोषि महिनि|	thou rich in torrents who with might quickenest earth o mighty one.
सतोमासस तवा विचारिणि परति षटोभन्त्य अक्तुभिः|	to thee o wanderer at will ring out the lauds with beams of day.
पर या वाजं न हेषन्तम पेरुम अस्यस्य अर्जुनि|	who drivest like a neighing steed the swelling cloud o bright of hue.
दर्ळ्हा चिद या वनस्पतीन कष्मया दर्धर्ष्य ओजसा|	who graspest with thy might on earth een the strong sovrans of the wood.
यत ते अभ्रस्य विद्युतो दिवो वर्षन्ति वर्ष्टयः|	when from the lightning of thy cloud the rainfloods of the heaven descend.
अग्ने शर्धन्तम आ गणम पिष्टं रुक्मेभिर अञ्जिभिः|	agni that valorous company adorned with ornaments of gold.
विशो अद्य मरुताम अव हवये दिवश चिद रोचनाद अधि|	the people of the maruts i call down today even from the luminous realm of heaven.
यथा चिन मन्यसे हर्दा तद इन मे जग्मुर आशसः|	even as thou thinkest in thy heart thither my wishes also tend.
ये ते नेदिष्ठं हवनान्य आगमन तान वर्ध भीमसंद्र्शः|	those who have come most near to thine invoking calls strengthen them fearful to behold.
मीळ्हुष्मतीव पर्थिवी पराहता मदन्त्य एत्य अस्मद आ|	earth like a bounteous lady liberal of her gifts struck down and shaken yet exultant comes to us.
रक्षो न वो मरुतः शिमीवां अमो दुध्रो गौर इव भीमयुः|	impetuous as a bear o maruts is youi rush terrible as a dreadful bull.
नि ये रिणन्त्य ओजसा वर्था गावो न दुर्धुरः|	they who with mighty strength oerthrow like oxen difficult to yoke.
अश्मानं चित सवर्यम पर्वतं गिरिम पर चयावयन्ति यामभिः|	cause een the heavenly stone to shake  yea shake the rocky mountain as they race along.
उत तिष्ठ नूनम एषां सतोमैः समुक्षितानाम|	rise up even now with lauds i call the very numerous company.
मरुताम पुरुतमम अपूर्व्यं गवां सर्गम इव हवये|	unequalled of these maruts like a herd of kine grown up together in their strength.
युङगध्वं हय अरुषी रथे युङगध्वं रथेषु रोहितः|	bind to your car the bright red mares yoke the red coursers to your car.
युङगध्वं हरी अजिरा धुरि वोळ्हवे वहिष्ठा धुरि वोळ्हवे|	bind to the pole to draw the fleetfoot tawny steeds the best at drawing to the pole.
उत सय वाज्य अरुषस तुविष्वणिर इह सम धायि दर्शतः|	yea and this loudlyneighing bright red vigorous horse who hath been sutioned fair to see.
मा वो यामेषु मरुतश चिरं करत पर तं रथेषु चोदत|	let him not cause delay o maruts in your course urge ye him onward in your cars.
रथं नु मारुतं वयं शरवस्युम आ हुवामहे|	the maruts chariot ever fain to gather glory we invoke.
आ यस्मिन तस्थौ सुरणानि बिभ्रती सचा मरुत्सु रोदसी|	which rodasī hath mounted bringing pleasant gifts with maruts in her company.
तं वः शर्धं रथेशुभं तवेषम पनस्युम आ हुवे|	i call that brilliant band of yours adorable rapid on the car.
यस्मिन सुजाता सुभगा महीयते सचा मरुत्सु मीळ्हुषी|	whereon the bounteous dame auspicious nobly born shows glorious with the marut host.
आ चिकितान सुक्रतू देवौ मर्त रिशादसा|	o sapient man call the two gods the very wise who slay the foe.
वरुणाय रतपेशसे दधीत परयसे महे|	for varuṇa whose form is law place offerings for his great delight.
ता हि कषत्रम अविह्रुतं सम्यग असुर्यम आशाते|	for they have won unbroken sway in full perfection power divine.
अध वरतेव मानुषं सवर ण धायि दर्शतम|	and like high laws the world of man hath been made beautiful as light.
ता वाम एषे रथानाम उर्वीं गव्यूतिम एषाम|	therefore we praise you that your cars may travel far in front of ours.
रातहव्यस्य सुष्टुतिं दध्र्क सतोमैर मनामहे|	you who accept the eulogy of ratahavya with his hymns.
अधा हि काव्या युवं दक्षस्य पूर्भिर अद्भुता|	and ye show wmom wondrous gods with fulness of intelligence.
नि केतुना जनानां चिकेथे पूतदक्षसा|	by mens discernment are ve marked o ye whose might is purified.
तद रतम पर्थिवि बर्हच छरवेष रषीणाम|	this is the law sublime o earth to aid the Ṛṣis toil for fame.
जरयसानाव अरम पर्थ्व अति कषरन्ति यामभिः|	the two widespreading are prepared they come with ample overflow.
आ यद वाम ईयचक्षसा मित्र वयं च सूरयः|	mitra ye gods with wandering eyes would that the worshippers and we.
वयचिष्ठे बहुपाय्ये यतेमहि सवराज्ये|	might strive to reach the realm ye rule most spacious and protected well.
कुमारम माता युवतिः समुब्धं गुहा बिभर्ति न ददाति पित्रे|	the youthful mother keeps the boy in secret pressed to her close nor yields him to the father.
अनीकम अस्य न मिनज जनासः पुरः पश्यन्ति निहितम अरतौ|	but when he lies upon the arm the people see his unfading countenance before them.
कम एतं तवं युवते कुमारम पेषी बिभर्षि महिषी जजान|	what child is this thou carriest as handmaid o youthful one the consortqueen hath borne him.
पूर्वीर हि गर्भः शरदो ववर्धापश्यं जातं यद असूत माता|	the babe unborn increased through many autumns i saw him born what time his mother bare him.
हिरण्यदन्तं शुचिवर्णम आरात कषेत्राद अपश्यम आयुधा मिमानम|	i saw him from afar goldtoothed brightcoloured hurling his weapons from his habitation.
ददानो अस्मा अम्र्तं विप्र्क्वत किम माम अनिन्द्राः कर्णवन्न अनुक्थाः|	what time i gave him amṛta free from mixture how can the indraless the hymnless harm me.
कषेत्राद अपश्यं सनुतश चरन्तं सुमद यूथं न पुरु शोभमानम|	i saw him moving from the place he dwells in even as with a herd brilliantly shining.
न ता अग्र्भ्रन्न अजनिष्ट हि षः पलिक्नीर इद युवतयो भवन्ति|	these seized him not he had been born already they who were grey with age again grow youthful.
के मे मर्यकं वि यवन्त गोभिर न येषां गोपा अरणश चिद आस|	who separate my young bull from the cattle they whose protector was in truth no stranger.
य ईं जग्र्भुर अव ते सर्जन्त्व आजाति पश्व उप नश चिकित्वान|	let those whose hands have seized upon them free them may he observant drive the herd to usward.
वसां राजानं वसतिं जनानाम अरातयो नि दधुर मर्त्येषु|	mid mortal men godless have secreted the king of all who live home of the people.
बरह्माण्य अत्रेर अव तं सर्जन्तु निन्दितारो निन्द्यासो भवन्तु|	so may the prayers of atri give him freedom reproached in turn be those who now reproach him.
शुनश चिच छेपं निदितं सहस्राद यूपाद अमुञ्चो अशमिष्ट हि षः|	thou from the stake didst loose een Śunaḥśepa bound for a thousand for he prayed with fervour.
एवास्मद अग्ने वि मुमुग्धि पाशान होतश चिकित्व इह तू निषद्य|	so agni loose from us the bonds that bind us when thou art seated here o priest who knowest.
हर्णीयमानो अप हि मद ऐयेः पर मे देवानां वरतपा उवाच|	thou hast sped from me agni in thine anger this the protector of gods laws hath told me.
इन्द्रो विद्वां अनु हि तवा चचक्ष तेनाहम अग्ने अनुशिष्ट आगाम|	indra who knoweth bent his eye upon thee by him instructed am i come o agni.
वि जयोतिषा बर्हता भात्य अग्निर आविर विश्वानि कर्णुते महित्वा|	agni shines far and wide with lofty splendour and by his greatness makes all things apparent.
परादेवीर मायाः सहते दुरेवाः शिशीते शर्ङगे रक्षसे विनिक्षे|	he conquers godless and malign enchantments and sharpens both his horns to gore the rakṣas.
उत सवानासो दिवि षन्त्व अग्नेस तिग्मायुधा रक्षसे हन्तवा उ|	loud in the heaven above be agnis roarings with keenedged weapons to destroy the demons.
मदे चिद अस्य पर रुजन्ति भामा न वरन्ते परिबाधो अदेवीः|	forth burst his splendours in the somas rapture the godless bands press round but cannot stay him.
एतं ते सतोमं तुविजात विप्रो रथं न धीरः सवपा अतक्षम|	as a skilled craftsman makes a car a singer i mighty one this hymn for thee have fashioned.
यदीद अग्ने परति तवं देव हर्याः सवर्वतीर अप एना जयेम|	if thou o agni god accept it gladly may we obtain thereby the heavenly waters.
तुविग्रीवो वर्षभो वाव्र्धानो ऽशत्र्व अर्यः सम अजाति वेदः|	may he the strongnecked steer waxing in vigour gather the foemans wealth with none to check him.
इतीमम अग्निम अम्र्ता अवोचन बर्हिष्मते मनवे शर्म यंसद धविष्मते मनवे शर्म यंसत|	thus to this agni have the immortals spoken to man who spreads the grass may he grant shelter grant shelter to the man who brings oblation.
परातर्यावाणा परथमा यजध्वम पुरा गर्ध्राद अररुषः पिबातः|	first worship those who come at early morning let the twain drink before the giftless niggard.
परातर हि यज्ञम अश्विना दधाते पर शंसन्ति कवयः पूर्वभाजः|	the aśvins claim the sacrifice at daybreak the sages yielding the first share extol them.
परातर यजध्वम अश्विना हिनोत न सायम अस्ति देवया अजुष्टम|	worship at dawn and instigate the aśvins nor is the worshipper at eve rejected.
उतान्यो अस्मद यजते वि चावः पूर्वःपूर्वो यजमानो वनीयान|	besides ourselves another craves and worships each first in worship is most highly favoured.
हिरण्यत्वङ मधुवर्णो घर्तस्नुः पर्क्षो वहन्न आ रथो वर्तते वाम|	covered with gold meathtinted dropping fatness your chariot with its freight of food comes hither.
मनोजवा अश्विना वातरंहा येनातियाथो दुरितानि विश्वा|	swift as thought aśvins rapid as the tempest wherewith ye travel over all obstructions.
यो भूयिष्ठं नासत्याभ्यां विवेष चनिष्ठम पित्वो ररते विभागे|	he who hath served most often the nāsatyas and gives the sweetest food at distribution.
स तोकम अस्य पीपरच छमीभिर अनूर्ध्वभासः सदम इत तुतुर्यात|	furthers with his own holy works his offspring and ever passes those whose flames ascend not.
सम अश्विनोर अवसा नूतनेन मयोभुवा सुप्रणीती गमेम|	may we obtain the aśvins newest favour and gain their healthbestowing happy guidance.
आ नो रयिं वहतम ओत वीरान आ विश्वान्य अम्र्ता सौभगानि|	bring riches hither unto us and heroes and all felicity and joy immortals.
पर वेधसे कवये वेद्याय गिरम भरे यशसे पूर्व्याय|	to him the farrenowned the wise ordainer ancient and glorious a song i offer.
घर्तप्रसत्तो असुरः सुशेवो रायो धर्ता धरुणो वस्वो अग्निः|	enthroned in oil the asura blissgiver is agni firm support of noble riches.
रतेन रतं धरुणं धारयन्त यज्ञस्य शाके परमे वयोमन|	by holy law they kept supporting order by help of sacrifice in loftiest heaven.
दिवो धर्मन धरुणे सेदुषो नञ्ञ जातैर अजातां अभि ये ननक्षुः|	they who attained with born men to the unborn men seated on that stay heavens firm sustainer.
अङहोयुवस तन्वस तन्वते वि वयो महद दुष्टरम पूर्व्याय|	averting woe they labour hard to bring him the ancient plenteous food as power resistless.
स संवतो नवजातस तुतुर्यात सिङहं न करुद्धम अभितः परि षठुः|	may he born newly conquer his assailants round him they stand as round an angry lion.
मातेव यद भरसे पप्रथानो जनंजनं धायसे चक्षसे च|	when like a mother spreading forth to nourish to cherish and regard each man that liveth.
वयोवयो जरसे यद दधानः परि तमना विषुरूपो जिगासि|	consuming all the strength that thou hast gotten thou wanderest round thyself in varied fashion.
वाजो नु ते शवसस पात्व अन्तम उरुं दोघं धरुणं देव रायः|	may strength preserve the compass of thy vigour god that broad stream of thine that beareth riches.
पदं न तायुर गुहा दधानो महो राये चितयन्न अत्रिम अस्पः|	thou like a thief who keeps his refuge secret hast holpen atri to great wealth by teaching.
आ याह्य अद्रिभिः सुतं सोमं सोमपते पिब|	come thou to what the stones have pressed drink soma o thou somas lord.
वर्षन्न इन्द्र वर्षभिर वर्त्रहन्तम|	indra best vṛtraslayer strong one with the strong.
वर्षा गरावा वर्षा मदो वर्षा सोमो अयं सुतः|	strong is the stone the draught is strong strong is this soma that is pressed.
वर्षन्न इन्द्र वर्षभिर वर्त्रहन्तम|	indra best vṛtraslayer strong one with the strong.
वर्षा तवा वर्षणं हुवे वज्रिञ चित्राभिर ऊतिभिः|	as strong i call on thee the strong o thunderarmed with various aids.
वर्षन्न इन्द्र वर्षभिर वर्त्रहन्तम|	indra best vṛtraslayer strong one with the strong.
रजीषी वज्री वर्षभस तुराषाट छुष्मी राजा वर्त्रहा सोमपावा|	impetuous thunderer strong quelling the mighty king potent vṛtraslayer somadrinker.
युक्त्वा हरिभ्याम उप यासद अर्वाङ माध्यंदिने सवने मत्सद इन्द्रः|	may he come hither with his yoked bay horses may indra gladden him at the noon libation.
यत तवा सूर्य सवर्भानुस तमसाविध्यद आसुरः|	o sūrya when the asuras descendant svarbhanu pierced thee through and through with darkness.
अक्षेत्रविद यथा मुग्धो भुवनान्य अदीधयुः|	all creatures looked like one who is bewildered who knoweth not the place where he is standing.
सवर्भानोर अध यद इन्द्र माया अवो दिवो वर्तमाना अवाहन|	what time thou smotest down svarbhanus magic that spread itself beneath the sky o indra.
गूळ्हं सूर्यं तमसापव्रतेन तुरीयेण बरह्मणाविन्दद अत्रिः|	by his fourth sacred prayer atri disoovered sūrya concealed in gloom that stayed his function.
मा माम इमं तव सन्तम अत्र इरस्या दरुग्धो भियसा नि गारीत|	let not the oppressor with this dread through anger swallow me up for i am thine o atri.
तवम मित्रो असि सत्यराधास तौ मेहावतं वरुणश च राजा|	mitra art thou the sender of true blessings thou and king varuṇa be both my helpers.
गराव्णो बरह्मा युयुजानः सपर्यन कीरिणा देवान नमसोपशिक्षन|	the brahman atri as he set the pressstones serving the gods with praise and adoration.
अत्रिः सूर्यस्य दिवि चक्षुर आधात सवर्भानोर अप माया अघुक्षत|	established in the heaven the eye of sūrya and caused svarbhanus magic arts to vanish.
यं वै सूर्यं सवर्भानुस तमसाविध्यद आसुरः|	the atris found the sun again him whom svarbhanu of the brood.
अत्रयस तम अन्व अविन्दन नह्य अन्ये अशक्नुवन|	of asuras had pierced with gloom this none besides had power to do.
युञ्जते मन उत युञ्जते धियो विप्रा विप्रस्य बर्हतो विपश्चितः|	the priests of him the lofty priest wellskilled in hymns harness their spirit yea harness their holy thoughts.
वि होत्रा दधे वयुनाविद एक इन मही देवस्य सवितुः परिष्टुतिः|	he only knowing works assigns their priestly tasks yea lofty is the praise of savitar the god.
विश्वा रूपाणि परति मुञ्चते कविः परासावीद भद्रं दविपदे चतुष्पदे|	the sapient one arrays himself in every form for quadruped and biped he hath brought forth good.
वि नाकम अख्यत सविता वरेण्यो ऽनु परयाणम उषसो वि राजति|	excellent savitar hath looked on heavens high vault and shineth after the outgoing of the dawn.
यस्य परयाणम अन्व अन्य इद ययुर देवा देवस्य महिमानम ओजसा|	even he the god whose goingforth and majesty the other deities have followed with their might.
यः पार्थिवानि विममे स एतशो रजांसि देवः सविता महित्वना|	he who hath measured the terrestrial regions out by his great power he is the courser savitar.
उत यासि सवितस तरीणि रोचनोत सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिः सम उच्यसि|	to the three spheres of light thou goest savitar and with the rays of sidrya thou combinest thee.
उत रात्रीम उभयतः परीयस उत मित्रो भवसि देव धर्मभिः|	around on both sides thou encompassest the night yea thou o god art mitra through thy righteous laws.
उतेशिषे परसवस्य तवम एक इद उत पूषा भवसि देव यामभिः|	over all generation thou art lord alone pūṣan art thou o god in all thy goingsforth.
उतेदं विश्वम भुवनं वि राजसि शयावाश्वस ते सवित सतोमम आनशे|	yea thou hast domination over all this world Śyāvāśva hath brought praise to thee o savitar.
यद इन्द्र चित्र मेहनास्ति तवादातम अद्रिवः|	stonedarting indra wondrous one what wealth is richly given from thee.
राधस तन नो विदद्वस उभयाहस्त्य आ भर|	that bounty treasurefinder bring filling both thy hands to us.
यन मन्यसे वरेण्यम इन्द्र दयुक्षं तद आ भर|	bring what thou deemest worth the wish o indra that which is in heaven.
विद्याम तस्य ते वयम अकूपारस्य दावने|	so may we know thee as thou art boundless in thy munificence.
यत ते दित्सु परराध्यम मनो अस्ति शरुतम बर्हत|	thy lofty spirit farrenowned as fain to give and prompt to win.
तेन दर्ळ्हा चिद अद्रिव आ वाजं दर्षि सातये|	with this thou rendest een the firm stonedarter so to gain thee strength.
मंहिष्ठं वो मघोनां राजानं चर्षणीनाम|	singers with many songs have made indra propitious to their fame.
इन्द्रम उप परशस्तये पूर्वीभिर जुजुषे गिरः|	him who is king of human kind most liberal of your wealthy ones.
अस्मा इत काव्यं वच उक्थम इन्द्राय शंस्यम|	to him to indra must be sung the poets word the hymn of praise.
तस्मा उ बरह्मवाहसे गिरो वर्धन्त्य अत्रयो गिरः शुम्भन्त्य अत्रयः|	to him accepter of the prayer the atris raise their songs on high the atris beautify their songs.
यद अद्य सथः परावति यद अर्वावत्य अश्विना|	whether o aśvins ye this day be far remote or near at hand.
यद वा पुरू पुरुभुजा यद अन्तरिक्ष आ गतम|	in many spots or in midair come hither lords of ample wealth.
इह तया पुरुभूतमा पुरू दंसांसि बिभ्रता|	these here who show oer widest space bringing full many a wondrous act.
वरस्या याम्य अध्रिगू हुवे तुविष्टमा भुजे|	resistless lovingly i seek i call the mightiest to enjoy.
ईर्मान्यद वपुषे वपुश चक्रं रथस्य येमथुः|	another beauteous wheel have ye fixed there to decorate your car.
पर्य अन्या नाहुषा युगा मह्ना रजांसि दीयथः|	with others through the realms ye roam in might unto the neighbouring tribes.
तद ऊ षु वाम एना कर्तं विश्वा यद वाम अनु षटवे|	that deed of yours that is extolled visvas hath all been done with this.
नाना जाताव अरेपसा सम अस्मे बन्धुम एयथुः|	born otherwise and spotless ye have entered kinships bonds with us.
आ यद वां सूर्या रथं तिष्ठद रघुष्यदं सदा|	when sūrya mounted on your car that rolls for ever rapidly.
परि वाम अरुषा वयो घर्णा वरन्त आतपः|	birds of red hue were round about and burning splendours compassed you.
युवोर अत्रिश चिकेतति नरा सुम्नेन चेतसा|	atri bethinks himself of you o heroes with a friendly mind.
घर्मं यद वाम अरेपसं नासत्यास्ना भुरण्यति|	what time nāsatyas with his mouth he stirs the spotless flame for you.
उग्रो वां ककुहो ययिः शर्ण्वे यामेषु संतनिः|	strong is your swiftly moving steed famed his exertion in the course.
यद वां दंसोभिर अश्विनात्रिर नराववर्तति|	when by your great deeds aśvins chiefs atri is brought to us again.
मध्व ऊ षु मधूयुवा रुद्रा सिषक्ति पिप्युषी|	lovers of sweetness rudras she who streams with sweetness waits on you.
यत समुद्राति पर्षथः पक्वाः पर्क्षो भरन्त वाम|	when ye have travelled through the seas men bring you gifts of welldressed food.
सत्यम इद वा उ अश्विना युवाम आहुर मयोभुवा|	aśvins with truth they call you twain bestowers of felicity.
ता यामन यामहूतमा यामन्न आ मर्ळयत्तमा|	at sacrifice most prompt to hear most gracious ye at sacrifice.
इमा बरह्माणि वर्धनाश्विभ्यां सन्तु शंतमा|	most pleasing to the aśvins be these prayers which magnify their might.
या तक्षाम रथां इवावोचाम बर्हन नमः|	which we have fashioned even as cars high reverence have we spoken forth.
पर सम्राजे बर्हद अर्चा गभीरम बरह्म परियं वरुणाय शरुताय|	sing forth a hymn sublime and solemn grateful to glorious varuṇa imperial ruler.
वि यो जघान शमितेव चर्मोपस्तिरे पर्थिवीं सूर्याय|	who hath struck out like one who slays the victim earth as a skin to spread in front of sūrya.
वनेषु वय अन्तरिक्षं ततान वाजम अर्वत्सु पय उस्रियासु|	in the treetops the air he hath extended put milk in kine and vigorous speed in horses.
हर्त्सु करतुं वरुणो अप्स्व अग्निं दिवि सूर्यम अदधात सोमम अद्रौ|	set intellect in hearts fire in the waters siurya in heaven and soma on the mountain.
नीचीनबारं वरुणः कवन्धम पर ससर्ज रोदसी अन्तरिक्षम|	varuṇa lets the big cask opening downward flow through the heaven and earth and airs midregion.
तेन विश्वस्य भुवनस्य राजा यवं न वर्ष्टिर वय उनत्ति भूम|	therewith the universes sovran waters earth as the shower of rain bedews the barley.
उनत्ति भूमिम पर्थिवीम उत दयां यदा दुग्धं वरुणो वष्ट्य आद इत|	when varuṇa is fain for milk he moistens the sky the land and earth to her foundation.
सम अभ्रेण वसत पर्वतासस तविषीयन्तः शरथयन्त वीराः|	then straight the mountains clothe them in the raincloud the heroes putting forth their vigour loose them.
इमाम ऊ षव रसुरस्य शरुतस्य महीम मायां वरुणस्य पर वोचम|	i will declare this mighty deed of magic of glorious varuṇa the lord immortal.
मानेनेव तस्थिवां अन्तरिक्षे वि यो ममे पर्थिवीं सूर्येण|	who standing in the firmament hath meted the earth out with the sun as with a measure.
इमाम ऊ नु कवितमस्य मायाम महीं देवस्य नकिर आ दधर्ष|	none verily hath ever let or hindered this the most wise gods mighty deed of magic.
एकं यद उद्ना न पर्णन्त्य एनीर आसिञ्चन्तीर अवनयः समुद्रम|	whereby with all their flood the lucid rivers fill not one sea wherein they pour their waters.
अर्यम्यं वरुण मित्र्यं वा सखायं वा सदम इद भरातरं वा|	if we have sinned against the man who loves us have ever wronged a brother friend or comrade.
वेशं वा नित्यं वरुणारणं वा यत सीम आगश चक्र्मा शिश्रथस तत|	the neighbour ever with us or a stranger o varuṇa remove from us the trespass.
कितवासो यद रिरिपुर न दीवि यद वा घा सत्यम उत यन न विद्म|	if we as gamesters cheat at play have cheated done wrong unwittingly or sinned of purpose.
सर्वा ता वि षय शिथिरेव देवाधा ते सयाम वरुण परियासः|	cast all these sins away like loosened fetters and varuṇa let us be thine own beloved.
अग्ने सहन्तम आ भर दयुम्नस्य परासहा रयिम|	by thy fair splendours mighty power o agni bring victorious wealth.
विश्वा यश चर्षणीर अभ्य रसा वाजेषु सासहत|	wealth that oercometh all mankind and near us conquereth in fight.
तम अग्ने पर्तनाषहं रयिं सहस्व आ भर|	victorious agni bring to us the wealth that vanquisheth in war.
तवं हि सत्यो अद्भुतो दाता वाजस्य गोमतः|	for thou art wonderful and true giver of strength in herds of kine.
विश्वे हि तवा सजोषसो जनासो वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	for all the folk with one accord whose sacred grass is trimmed and strewn.
होतारं सद्मसु परियं वयन्ति वार्या पुरु|	invite thee to their worshiphalls as a dear priest for choicest wealth.
स हि षमा विश्वचर्षणिर अभिमाति सहो दधे|	for he the god of all men hath gotten him might that quelleth foes.
अग्न एषु कषयेष्व आ रेवन नः शुक्र दीदिहि दयुमत पावक दीदिहि|	o agni in these homes shine forth bright god for our prosperity shine purifier splendidly.
तं वां रथं वयम अद्या हुवेम पर्थुज्रयम अश्विना संगतिं गोः|	we will invoke this day your car farspreading o aśvins even the gathering of the sunlight.
यः सूर्यां वहति वन्धुरायुर गिर्वाहसम पुरुतमं वसूयुम|	car praised in hymns most ample rich in treasure fitted with seats the car that beareth sūrya.
युवं शरियम अश्विना देवता तां दिवो नपाता वनथः शचीभिः|	aśvins ye gained that glory by your godhead ye sons of heaven by your own might and power.
युवोर वपुर अभि पर्क्षः सचन्ते वहन्ति यत ककुहासो रथे वाम|	food followeth close upon your bright appearing when stately horses in your chariot draw you.
को वाम अद्या करते रातहव्य ऊतये वा सुतपेयाय वार्कैः|	who bringeth you today for help with offered oblation or with hymns to drink the juices.
रतस्य वा वनुषे पूर्व्याय नमो येमानो अश्विना ववर्तत|	who for the sacrifices ancient lover turneth you hither aśvins offering homage.
हिरण्ययेन पुरुभू रथेनेमं यज्ञं नासत्योप यातम|	borne on your golden car ye omnipresent come to this sacrifice of ours nāsatyas.
पिबाथ इन मधुनः सोम्यस्य दधथो रत्नं विधते जनाय|	drink of the pleasant liquor of the soma give riches to the people who adore you.
आ नो यातं दिवो अछा पर्थिव्या हिरण्ययेन सुव्र्ता रथेन|	come hitherward to us from earth from heaven borne on your golden chariot rolling lightly.
मा वाम अन्ये नि यमन देवयन्तः सं यद ददे नाभिः पूर्व्या वाम|	suffer not other worshippers to stay you here are ye bound by earlier bonds of friendship.
नू नो रयिम पुरुवीरम बर्हन्तं दस्रा मिमाथाम उभयेष्व अस्मे|	now for us both mete out o wonderworkers riches exceeding great with store of heroes.
नरो यद वाम अश्विना सतोमम आवन सधस्तुतिम आजमीळ्हासो अग्मन|	because the men have sent you praise o aśvins and ajamīlhas come to the laudation.
इहेह यद वां समना पप्र्क्षे सेयम अस्मे सुमतिर वाजरत्ना|	wheneer i gratified you here together your grace was given us o ye rich in booty.
उरुष्यतं जरितारं युवं ह शरितः कामो नासत्या युवद्रिक|	protect ye twain the singer of your praises to you nāsatyas is my wish directed.
गर्भे नु सन्न अन्व एषाम अवेदम अहं देवानां जनिमानि विश्वा|	i as i lay within the womb considered all generations of these gods in order.
शतम मा पुर आयसीर अरक्षन्न अध शयेनो जवसा निर अदीयम|	a hundred iron fortresses confined me but forth i flew with rapid speed a falcon.
न घा स माम अप जोषं जभाराभीम आस तवक्षसा वीर्येण|	not at his own free pleasure did he bear me he conquered with his strength and manly courage.
ईर्मा पुरंधिर अजहाद अरातीर उत वातां अतरच छूशुवानः|	straightway the bold one left the fiends behind him and passed the winds as he grew yet more mighty.
अव यच छयेनो अस्वनीद अध दयोर वि यद यदि वात ऊहुः पुरंधिम|	when with loud cry from heaven down sped the falcon thence hasting like the wind he bore the bold one.
सर्जद यद अस्मा अव ह कषिपज जयां कर्शानुर अस्ता मनसा भुरण्यन|	then wildly raging in his mind the archer kṛśānu aimed and loosed the string to strike him.
रजिप्य ईम इन्द्रावतो न भुज्युं शयेनो जभार बर्हतो अधि षणोः|	the falcon bore him from heavens lofty summit as the swift car of indras friend bore bhujyu.
अन्तः पतत पतत्र्य अस्य पर्णम अध यामनि परसितस्य तद वेः|	then downward hither fell a flying feather of the bird hasting forward in his journey.
अध शवेतं कलशं गोभिर अक्तम आपिप्यानम मघवा शुक्रम अन्धः|	and now let maghavan accept the beaker white filled with milk filled with the shining liquid.
अध्वर्युभिः परयतम मध्वो अग्रम इन्द्रो मदाय परति धत पिबध्यै शूरो मदाय परति धत पिबध्यै|	the best of sweet meath which the priests have offered that indra to his joy may drink the hero that he may take and drink it to his rapture.
अहम मनुर अभवं सूर्यश चाहं कक्षीवां रषिर अस्मि विप्रः|	i was aforetime manu i was sūrya i am the sage kakṣīvān holy singer.
अहं कुत्सम आर्जुनेयं नय ॠञ्जे ऽहं कविर उशना पश्यता मा|	kutsa the son of Ārjuni i master i am the sapient uśanā behold me.
अहम भूमिम अददाम आर्यायाहं वर्ष्टिं दाशुषे मर्त्याय|	i have bestowed the earth upon the Ārya and rain upon the man who brings oblation.
अहम अपो अनयं वावशाना मम देवासो अनु केतम आयन|	i guided forth the loudlyroaring waters and the gods moved according to my pleasure.
अहम पुरो मन्दसानो वय ऐरं नव साकं नवतीः शम्बरस्य|	in the wild joy of soma i demolished Śambaras forts ninetyandnine together.
शततमं वेश्यं सर्वताता दिवोदासम अतिथिग्वं यद आवम|	and utterly the hundredth habitation when helping divodāsa atithigva.
पर सु ष विभ्यो मरुतो विर अस्तु पर शयेनः शयेनेभ्य आशुपत्वा|	before all birds be ranked this bird o maruts supreme of falcons be this fleetwinged falcon.
अचक्रया यत सवधया सुपर्णो हव्यम भरन मनवे देवजुष्टम|	because strong pinioned with no car to bear him he brought to manu the godloved oblation.
भरद यदि विर अतो वेविजानः पथोरुणा मनोजवा असर्जि|	when the bird brought it hence in rapid motion sent on the wide path fleet as thought he hurried.
तूयं ययौ मधुना सोम्येनोत शरवो विविदे शयेनो अत्र|	swift he returned with sweetness of the soma and hence the falcon hath acquired his glory.
रजीपी शयेनो ददमानो अंशुम परावतः शकुनो मन्द्रम मदम|	bearing the stalk the falcon speeding onward bird bringing from afar the draught that gladdens.
सोमम भरद दाद्र्हाणो देवावान दिवो अमुष्माद उत्तराद आदाय|	friend of the gods brought grasping fast the soma which be bad taken from yon loftiest heaven.
आदाय शयेनो अभरत सोमं सहस्रं सवां अयुतं च साकम|	the falcon took and brought the soma bearing thousand libations with him yea ten thousand.
अत्रा पुरंधिर अजहाद अरातीर मदे सोमस्य मूरा अमूरः|	the bold one left malignities behind him wise in wild joy of soma left the foolish.
भद्रं ते अग्ने सहसिन्न अनीकम उपाक आ रोचते सूर्यस्य|	thy blessed majesty victorious agni shines brightly in the neighbourhood of sūrya.
रुशद दर्शे दद्र्शे नक्तया चिद अरूक्षितं दर्श आ रूपे अन्नम|	splendid to see it shows even at nighttime and food is fair to look on in thy beauty.
वि षाह्य अग्ने गर्णते मनीषां खं वेपसा तुविजात सतवानः|	agni disclose his thought for him who singeth the well strong god while thou art praised with fervour.
विश्वेभिर यद वावनः शुक्र देवैस तन नो रास्व सुमहो भूरि मन्म|	vouchsafe to us that powerful hymn o mighty which radiant one with all the gods thou lovest.
तवद अग्ने काव्या तवन मनीषास तवद उक्था जायन्ते राध्यानि|	from thee o agni springs poetic wisdom from thee come thoughts and hymns of praise that prosper.
तवद एति दरविणं वीरपेशा इत्थाधिये दाशुषे मर्त्याय|	from thee flows wealth with heroes to adorn it to the truehearted man who gives oblation.
तवद वाजी वाजम्भरो विहाया अभिष्टिक्र्ज जायते सत्यशुष्मः|	from thee the hero springs who wins the booty bringer of help mighty of real courage.
तवद रयिर देवजूतो मयोभुस तवद आशुर जूजुवां अग्ने अर्वा|	from thee comes wealth sent by the gods blissgiving agni from thee the fleet impetuous charger.
तवाम अग्ने परथमं देवयन्तो देवम मर्ता अम्र्त मन्द्रजिह्वम|	immortal agni thee whose voice is pleasant as first in rank as god religious mortals.
दवेषोयुतम आ विवासन्ति धीभिर दमूनसं गर्हपतिम अमूरम|	invite with hymns thee who removest hatred friend of the home the households lord unerring.
आरे अस्मद अमतिम आरे अंह आरे विश्वां दुर्मतिं यन निपासि|	far from us thou removest want and sorrow far from us all illwill when thou protectest.
दोषा शिवः सहसः सूनो अग्ने यं देव आ चित सचसे सवस्ति|	son of strength agni blest is he at evening whom thou as god attendest for his welfare.
मम दविता राष्ट्रं कषत्रियस्य विश्वायोर विश्वे अम्र्ता यथा नः|	i am the royal ruler mine is empire as mine who sway all life are all immortals.
करतुं सचन्ते वरुणस्य देवा राजामि कर्ष्टेर उपमस्य वव्रेः|	varuṇas will the gods obey and follow i am the king of mens most lofty cover.
अहं राजा वरुणो मह्यं तान्य असुर्याणि परथमा धारयन्त|	i am king varuṇa to me were given these first existing high celestial powers.
करतुं सचन्ते वरुणस्य देवा राजामि कर्ष्टेर उपमस्य वव्रेः|	varuṇas will the gods obey and follow i am the king of mens most lofty cover.
अहम इन्द्रो वरुणस ते महित्वोर्वी गभीरे रजसी सुमेके|	i varuṇa am indra in their greatness these the two wide deep fairlyfashioned regions.
तवष्टेव विश्वा भुवनानि विद्वान सम ऐरयं रोदसी धारयं च|	these the two worldhalves have i even as tvaṣṭar knowing all beings joined and held together.
अहम अपो अपिन्वम उक्षमाणा धारयं दिवं सदन रतस्य|	i made to flow the moistureshedding waters and set the heaven firm in the scat of order.
रतेन पुत्रो अदितेर रतावोत तरिधातु परथयद वि भूम|	by law the son of aditi law observer hath spread abroad the world in threefold measure.
मां नरः सवश्वा वाजयन्तो मां वर्ताः समरणे हवन्ते|	heroes with noble horses fain for battle selected warriors call on me in combat.
कर्णोम्य आजिम मघवाहम इन्द्र इयर्मि रेणुम अभिभूत्योजाः|	i indra maghavan excite the conflict i stir the dust lord of surpassing vigour.
अहं ता विश्वा चकरं नकिर मा दैव्यं सहो वरते अप्रतीतम|	all this i did the gods own conquering power never impedeth me whom none opposeth.
यन मा सोमासो ममदन यद उक्थोभे भयेते रजसी अपारे|	when lauds and soma juice have made me joyful both the unbounded regions are affrighted.
विदुष ते विश्वा भुवनानि तस्य ता पर बरवीषि वरुणाय वेधः|	all beings know these deeds of thine thou tellest this unto varuṇa thou great disposer.
तवं वर्त्राणि शर्ण्विषे जघन्वान तवं वर्तां अरिणा इन्द्र सिन्धून|	thou art renowned as having slain the vṛtras thou madest flow the floods that were obstructed.
अस्माकम अत्र पितरस त आसन सप्त रषयो दौर्गहे बध्यमाने|	our fathers then were these the seven his what time the son of durgaha was captive.
त आयजन्त तरसदस्युम अस्या इन्द्रं न वर्त्रतुरम अर्धदेवम|	for her they gained by sacrifice trasadasyu a demigod like indra conquering foemen.
पुरुकुत्सानी हि वाम अदाशद धव्येभिर इन्द्रावरुणा नमोभिः|	the spouse of purukutsa gave oblations to you o indravaruṇa with homage.
अथा राजानं तरसदस्युम अस्या वर्त्रहणं ददथुर अर्धदेवम|	then unto her ye gave king trasadasyu the demigod the slayer of the foeman.
राया वयं ससवांसो मदेम हव्येन देवा यवसेन गावः|	may we possessing much delight in riches gods in oblations and the kine in pasture.
तां धेनुम इन्द्रावरुणा युवं नो विश्वाहा धत्तम अनपस्फुरन्तीम|	and that milchcow who shrinks not from the milking o indravaruṇa give to us daily.
आ न इन्द्रो दूराद आ न आसाद अभिष्टिक्र्द अवसे यासद उग्रः|	from near or far away may mighty indra giver of succour come for our protection.
ओजिष्ठेभिर नर्पतिर वज्रबाहुः संगे समत्सु तुर्वणिः पर्तन्यून|	lord of men armed with thunder with the strongest slaying his foes in conflict in the battles.
आ न इन्द्रो हरिभिर यात्व अछार्वाचीनो ऽवसे राधसे च|	may indra come to us with tawny coursers inclined to us to favour and enrich us.
तिष्ठाति वज्री मघवा विरप्शीमं यज्ञम अनु नो वाजसातौ|	may maghavan loudvoiced and wielding thunder stand by us at this sacrifice in combat.
इमं यज्ञं तवम अस्माकम इन्द्र पुरो दधत सनिष्यसि करतुं नः|	thou honouring this our sacrifice o indra shalt give us strength and fill us full of courage.
शवघ्नीव वज्रिन सनये धनानां तवया वयम अर्य आजिं जयेम|	to win the booty thunderarmed like hunters may we with thee subdue in fight our foemen.
उशन्न उ षु णः सुमना उपाके सोमस्य नु सुषुतस्य सवधावः|	loving us well benevolent close beside us drink godlike indra of the wellpressed soma.
पा इन्द्र परतिभ्र्तस्य मध्वः सम अन्धसा ममदः पर्ष्ठ्येन|	drink of the meath we offer and delight thee with food that cometh from the mountain ridges.
वि यो ररप्श रषिभिर नवेभिर वर्क्षो न पक्वः सर्ण्यो न जेता|	him who is sung aloud by recent sages like a ripefruited tree a scythearmed victor.
मर्यो न योषाम अभि मन्यमानो ऽछा विवक्मि पुरुहूतम इन्द्रम|	i like a bridegroom thinking of his consort call hither indra him invoked of many.
गिरिर न यः सवतवां रष्व इन्द्रः सनाद एव सहसे जात उग्रः|	him who in native strength is like a mountain the lofty indra born or old for conquest.
आदर्ता वज्रं सथविरं न भीम उद्नेव कोशं वसुना नयॄष्टम|	terrific wielder of the ancient thunder filled full with splendour as a jar with water.
न यस्य वर्ता जनुषा नव अस्ति न राधस आमरीता मघस्य|	whom from of old there is not one to hinder none to curtail the riches of his bounty.
उद्वाव्र्षाणस तविषीव उग्रास्मभ्यं दद्धि पुरुहूत रायः|	pouring forth freely o thou strong and mighty vouchsafe us riches god invoked of many.
ईक्षे रायः कषयस्य चर्षणीनाम उत वरजम अपवर्तासि गोनाम|	of wealth and homes of men thou art the ruler and opener of the stable of the cattle.
शिक्षानरः समिथेषु परहावान वस्वो राशिम अभिनेतासि भूरिम|	helper of men winner of spoil in combats thou leadest to an ample heap of riches.
कया तच छर्ण्वे शच्या शचिष्ठो यया कर्णोति मुहु का चिद रष्वः|	by what great might is he renowned as strongest wherewith the lofty one stirs up wild battles.
पुरु दाशुषे विचयिष्ठो अंहो ऽथा दधाति दरविणं जरित्रे|	best soother of the worshippers great sorrow he gives possessions to the man who lauds him.
मा नो मर्धीर आ भरा दद्धि तन नः पर दाशुषे दातवे भूरि यत ते|	slay us not bring bestow onus the ample gift which thou hast to give to him who offers.
नव्ये देष्णे शस्ते अस्मिन त उक्थे पर बरवाम वयम इन्द्र सतुवन्तः|	at this new gift with this laud sung before thee extolling thee we indra will declare it.
नू षटुत इन्द्र नू गर्णान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो न पीपेः|	now indra lauded glorified with praises let power swell high like rivers for the singer.
अकारि ते हरिवो बरह्म नव्यं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	a new hymn lord of bays for thee is fashioned may we carborn through song be victors ever.
आ न सतुत उप वाजेभिर ऊती इन्द्र याहि हरिभिर मन्दसानः|	come lauded unto us with powers and succours o indra with thy tawny steeds exulting.
तिरश चिद अर्यः सवना पुरूण्य आङगूषेभिर गर्णानः सत्यराधाः|	past even the foemans manifold libations glorified with our hymns true wealthbestower.
आ हि षमा याति नर्यश चिकित्वान हूयमानः सोत्र्भिर उप यज्ञम|	mans friend to this our sacrifice he cometh marking how he is called by somapressers.
सवश्वो यो अभीरुर मन्यमानः सुष्वाणेभिर मदति सं ह वीरैः|	fearless and conscious that his steeds are noble he joyeth with the somapouring heroes.
शरावयेद अस्य कर्णा वाजयध्यै जुष्टाम अनु पर दिशम मन्दयध्यै|	make his cars hear that he may show his vigour and may be joyful in the way he loveth.
उद्वाव्र्षाणो राधसे तुविष्मान करन न इन्द्रः सुतीर्थाभयं च|	may mighty indra pouring forth in bounty bestow on us good roads and perfect safety.
अछा यो गन्ता नाधमानम ऊती इत्था विप्रं हवमानं गर्णन्तम|	he who with succour comes to his implorer the singer here who with his song invites him.
उप तमनि दधानो धुर्य आशून सहस्राणि शतानि वज्रबाहुः|	he who himself sets to the pole swift coursers he who hath hundreds thousands thunderwielder.
तवोतासो मघवन्न इन्द्र विप्रा वयं ते सयाम सूरयो गर्णन्तः|	o indra maghavan by thee protected may we be thine princes and priests and singers.
भेजानासो बर्हद्दिवस्य राय आकाय्यस्य दावने पुरुक्षोः|	sharing the riches sent from lofty heaven which yields much food and all desire its bounty.
यो मर्त्येष्व अम्र्त रतावा देवो देवेष्व अरतिर निधायि|	the faithful one immortal among mortals a god among the gods appointed envoy.
होता यजिष्ठो मह्ना शुचध्यै हव्यैर अग्निर मनुष ईरयध्यै|	priest best at worship must shine forth in glory  agni shall be raised high with mans oblations.
इह तवं सूनो सहसो नो अद्य जातो जातां उभयां अन्तर अग्ने|	born for us here this day o son of vigour between both races of born beings agni.
दूत ईयसे युयुजान रष्व रजुमुष्कान वर्षणः शुक्रांश च|	thou farest as an envoy having harnessed sublime one thy strongmuscled radiant stallions.
अत्या वर्धस्नू रोहिता घर्तस्नू रतस्य मन्ये मनसा जविष्ठा|	i laud the ruddy steeds who pour down blessing dropping oil flectest through the thoualit of order.
अन्तर ईयसे अरुषा युजानो युष्मांश च देवान विश आ च मर्तान|	yoking red horses to and fro thou goest between you deities and mortal races.
अर्यमणं वरुणम मित्रम एषाम इन्द्राविष्णू मरुतो अश्विनोत|	aryaman mitra varuṇa and indra with viṣṇu of the gods maruts and aśvins.
सवश्वो अग्ने सुरथः सुराधा एद उ वह सुहविषे जनाय|	these agni with good car and steeds bring hither most bountiful to folk with fair oblations.
गोमां अग्ने ऽविमां अश्वी यज्ञो नर्वत्सखा सदम इद अप्रम्र्ष्यः|	agni be this our sacrifice eternal with brave friends rich in kine and sheep and horses.
इळावां एषो असुर परजावान दीर्घो रयिः पर्थुबुध्नः सभावान|	rich asura in sacred food and children in full assembly wealth broadbased and during.
यस त इध्मं जभरत सिष्विदानो मूर्धानं वा ततपते तवाया|	the man who sweating brings for thee the fuel and makes his head to ache thy faithful servant.
भुवस तस्य सवतवांः पायुर अग्ने विश्वस्मात सीम अघायत उरुष्य|	agni to him be a selfstrong protector guard him from all who seek to do him mischief.
यस ते भराद अन्नियते चिद अन्नं निशिषन मन्द्रम अतिथिम उदीरत|	who brings thee food though thou hast food in plenty welcomes his cheerful guest and speeds him onward.
आ देवयुर इनधते दुरोणे तस्मिन रयिर धरुवो अस्तु दास्वान|	who kindles thee devoutly in his dwellingto him be wealth secure and freely giving.
यस तवा दोषा य उषसि परशंसात परियं वा तवा कर्णवते हविष्मान|	whoso sings praise to thee at eve or morning and with oblation doth the thing thou lovest.
अश्वो न सवे दम आ हेम्यावान तम अंहसः पीपरो दाश्वांसम|	in his own home even as a goidgirt courser rescue him from distress the bounteous giver.
यस तुभ्यम अग्ने अम्र्ताय दाशद दुवस तवे कर्णवते यतस्रुक|	whoso brings gifts to thee immortal agni and doth thee service with uplifted ladle.
न स राया शशमानो वि योषन नैनम अंहः परि वरद अघायोः|	let him not sorely toiling lose his riches let not the sinners wickedness enclose him.
यस्य तवम अग्ने अध्वरं जुजोषो देवो मर्तस्य सुधितं रराणः|	whose wellwrought worship thou acceptest agni thou god a mortals gift thou liberal giver.
परीतेद असद धोत्रा सा यविष्ठासाम यस्य विधतो वर्धासः|	dear be his sacrifice to thee most youthful and may we strengthen him when he adores thee.
चित्तिम अचित्तिं चिनवद वि विद्वान पर्ष्ठेव वीता वर्जिना च मर्तान|	may he who knows distinguish sense and folly of men like straight and crooked backs of horses.
राये च नः सवपत्याय देव दितिं च रास्वादितिम उरुष्य|	lead us o god to wealth and noble offspring keep penury afar and grant us plenty.
कविं शशासुः कवयो ऽदब्धा निधारयन्तो दुर्यास्व आयोः|	this sage the sages neer deceived commanded setting him down in dwellings of the living.
अतस तवं दर्श्यां अग्न एतान पड्भिः पश्येर अद्भुतां अर्य एवैः|	hence mayst thou friendly god with rapid footsteps behold the gods wonderful fair to look on.
तवम अग्ने वाघते सुप्रणीतिः सुतसोमाय विधते यविष्ठ|	good guidance hast thou for the priest o agni who youngest god with outpoured soma serves thee.
रत्नम भर शशमानाय घर्ष्वे पर्थु शचन्द्रम अवसे चर्षणिप्राः|	ruler of men thou joyous god bring treasure splendid and plentiful to aid the toiler.
अधा ह यद वयम अग्ने तवाया पड्भिर हस्तेभिश चक्र्मा तनूभिः|	now all that we thy faithful servants agni have done with feet with hands and with our bodies.
रथं न करन्तो अपसा भुरिजोर रतं येमुः सुध्य आशुषाणाः|	the wise with toil the holy rite have guided as those who frame a car with manual cunning.
अधा मातुर उषसः सप्त विप्रा जायेमहि परथमा वेधसो नॄन|	may we seven sages first in rank engender from dawn the mother men to be ordainers.
दिवस पुत्रा अङगिरसो भवेमाद्रिं रुजेम धनिनं शुचन्तः|	may we aṅgirases be sons of heaven and radiant burst the wealthcontaining mountain.
अधा यथा नः पितरः परासः परत्नासो अग्न रतम आशुषाणाः|	as in the days of old our ancient fathers speeding the work of holy worship agni.
शुचीद अयन दीधितिम उक्थशासः कषामा भिन्दन्तो अरुणीर अप वरन|	sought pure light and devotion singing praises they cleft the ground and made red dawns apparent.
सुकर्माणः सुरुचो देवयन्तो ऽयो न देवा जनिमा धमन्तः|	gods doing holy acts devout resplendent smelting like ore their human generations.
शुचन्तो अग्निं वव्र्धन्त इन्द्रम ऊर्वं गव्यम परिषदन्तो अग्मन|	enkindling agni and exalting indra they came encompassing the stall of cattle.
आ यूथेव कषुमति पश्वो अख्यद देवानां यज जनिमान्त्य उग्र|	strong one he marked themand the gods before themlike herds of cattle in a foodful pasture.
मर्तानां चिद उर्वशीर अक्र्प्रन वर्धे चिद अर्य उपरस्यायोः|	there they moaned forth their strong desire for mortals to aid the true the nearest one the living.
अकर्म ते सवपसो अभूम रतम अवस्रन्न उषसो विभातीः|	we have worked for thee we have laboured noblybright dawns have shed their light upon our worship.
अनूनम अग्निम पुरुधा सुश्चन्द्रं देवस्य मर्म्र्जतश चारु चक्षुः|	adding a beauty to the perfect agni and the gods beauteous eye that shines for ever.
एता ते अग्न उचथानि वेधो ऽवोचाम कवये ता जुषस्व|	agni disposer we have sung these praises to thee the wise do thou accept them gladly.
उच छोचस्व कर्णुहि वस्यसो नो महो रायः पुरुवार पर यन्धि|	blaze up on high and ever make us richer give us great wealth o thou whose boons are many.
तवम महां इन्द्र तुभ्यं ह कषा अनु कषत्रम मंहना मन्यत दयौः|	great art thou indra yea the earth with gladness and heaven confess to thee thine high dominion.
तवं वर्त्रं शवसा जघन्वान सर्जः सिन्धूंर अहिना जग्रसानान|	thou in thy vigour having slaughtered vṛtra didst free the floods arrested by the dragon.
तव तविषो जनिमन रेजत दयौ रेजद भूमिर भियसा सवस्य मन्योः|	heaven trembled at the birth of thine effulgence earth trembled at the fear of thy displeasure.
रघायन्त सुभ्वः पर्वतास आर्दन धन्वानि सरयन्त आपः|	the stedfast mountains shook in agitation  the waters flowed and desert spots were flooded.
भिनद गिरिं शवसा वज्रम इष्णन्न आविष्क्र्ण्वानः सहसान ओजः|	hurling his bolt with might he cleft the mountain while putting forth his strength he showed his vigour.
वधीद वर्त्रं वज्रेण मन्दसानः सरन्न आपो जवसा हतव्र्ष्णीः|	he slaughtered vṛtra with his bolt exulting and their lord slain forth flowed the waters swiftly.
सुवीरस ते जनिता मन्यत दयौर इन्द्रस्य कर्ता सवपस्तमो भूत|	thy father dyaus esteemed himself a hero most noble was the work of indras maker.
य ईं जजान सवर्यं सुवज्रम अनपच्युतं सदसो न भूम|	his who begat the strong bolts lord who roareth immovable like earth from her foundation.
य एक इच चयावयति पर भूमा राजा कर्ष्टीनाम पुरुहूत इन्द्रः|	he who alone oerthrows the world of creatures indra the peoples king invoked of many.
सत्यम एनम अनु विश्वे मदन्ति रातिं देवस्य गर्णतो मघोनः|	verily all rejoice in him extolling the boons which maghavan the god hath sent them.
सत्रा सोमा अभवन्न अस्य विश्वे सत्रा मदासो बर्हतो मदिष्ठाः|	all soma juices are his own for ever most gladdening draughts are ever his the mighty.
सत्राभवो वसुपतिर वसूनां दत्रे विश्वा अधिथा इन्द्र कर्ष्टीः|	thou ever wast the treasurelord of treasures indra thou lettest all folk share thy bounty.
तवम अध परथमं जायमानो ऽमे विश्वा अधिथा इन्द्र कर्ष्टीः|	moreover when thou first wast born o indra thou struckest terror into all the people.
तवम परति परवत आशयानम अहिं वज्रेण मघवन वि वर्श्चः|	thou maghavan rentest with thy bolt the dragon who lay against the waterfloods of heaven.
सत्राहणं दाध्र्षिं तुम्रम इन्द्रम महाम अपारं वर्षभं सुवज्रम|	the everslaying bold and furious indra the bright bolts lord infinite strong and mighty.
हन्ता यो वर्त्रं सनितोत वाजं दाता मघानि मघवा सुराधाः|	who slayeth vṛtra and acquireth booty giver of blessings maghavan the bounteous.
अयं वर्तश चातयते समीचीर य आजिषु मघवा शर्ण्व एकः|	alone renowned as maghavan in battles he frighteneth away assembled armies.
अयं वाजम भरति यं सनोत्य अस्य परियासः सख्ये सयाम|	he bringeth us the booty that he winneth may we wellloved continue in his friendship.
अयं शर्ण्वे अध जयन्न उत घनन्न अयम उत पर कर्णुते युधा गाः|	renowned is he when conquering and when slaying fis he who winneth cattle in the combat.
यदा सत्यं कर्णुते मन्युम इन्द्रो विश्वं दर्ळ्हम भयत एजद अस्मात|	when indra hardeneth his indignation all that is fixed and all that moveth fear him.
सम इन्द्रो गा अजयत सं हिरण्या सम अश्विया मघवा यो ह पूर्वीः|	indra hath won all kine all gold all horsesmaghavan he who breaketh forts in pieces.
एभिर नर्भिर नर्तमो अस्य शाकै रायो विभक्ता सम्भरश च वस्वः|	most manly with these men of his who help him dealing out wealth and gathering the treasure.
कियत सविद इन्द्रो अध्य एति मातुः कियत पितुर जनितुर यो जजान|	what is the care of indra for his mother what cares he for the father who begat him.
यो अस्य शुष्मम मुहुकैर इयर्ति वातो न जूत सतनयद्भिर अभ्रैः|	his care is that which speeds his might in conflicts like wind borne onward by the clouds that thunder.
कषियन्तं तवम अक्षियन्तं कर्णोतीयर्ति रेणुम मघवा समोहम|	maghavan makes the settled man unsettled he scatters dust that he hath swept together.
विभञ्जनुर अशनिमां इव दयौर उत सतोतारम मघवा वसौ धात|	breaking in pieces like heaven armed with lightning maghavan shall enrich the man who lauds hm.
अयं चक्रम इषणत सूर्यस्य नय एतशं रीरमत सस्र्माणम|	he urged the chariotwheel of sūrya forward etaśa speeding on his way he rested.
आ कर्ष्ण ईं जुहुराणो जिघर्ति तवचो बुध्ने रजसो अस्य योनौ|	him the black undulating cloud bedeweth in this midairs depth at the base of darkness.
असिक्न्यां यजमानो न होता|	as in the night the sacrificing priest.
गव्यन्त इन्द्रं सख्याय विप्रा अश्वायन्तो वर्षणं वाजयन्तः|	eager for booty craving strength and horses wesingers stir indra the strong for friendship.
जनीयन्तो जनिदाम अक्षितोतिम आ चयावयामो ऽवते न कोशम|	who gives the wives we seek whose succour fails not to hasten like a pitcher to the fountain.
तराता नो बोधि दद्र्शान आपिर अभिख्याता मर्डिता सोम्यानाम|	be thou our guardian show thyself our kinsman watching and blessing those who pour the soma.
सखा पिता पित्र्तमः पित्णां कर्तेम उलोकम उशते वयोधाः|	as friend as sire most fatherly of fathers giving the suppliant vital strength and freedom.
सखीयताम अविता बोधि सखा गर्णान इन्द्र सतुवते वयो धाः|	be helping friend of those who seek thy friendship  give life when lauded indra to the singer.
वयं हय आ ते चक्र्मा सबाध आभिः शमीभिर महयन्त इन्द्र|	for indra we the priests have paid thee worship exalting thee with these our sacrifices.
सतुत इन्द्रो मघवा यद ध वर्त्रा भूरीण्य एको अप्रतीनि हन्ति|	alone when indra maghavan is lauded he slayeth many neerresisted vṛtras.
अस्य परियो जरिता यस्य शर्मन नकिर देवा वारयन्ते न मर्ताः|	him in whose keeping is the wellloved singer never do gods or mortals stay or hinder.
एवा न इन्द्रो मघवा विरप्शी करत सत्या चर्षणीध्र्द अनर्वा|	een so let maghavan the loudvoiced indra give us true blessings foeless mens upholder.
तवं राजा जनुषां धेह्य अस्मे अधि शरवो माहिनं यज जरित्रे|	king of all creatures give us glory amply exalted glory due to him who lauds thee.
नू षटुत इन्द्र नू गर्णान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो न पीपेः|	now indra lauded glorified with praises let power swell high like rivers for the singer.
अकारि ते हरिवो बरह्म नव्यं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	for thee a new hymn lord of bays is fashioned may we carborne through song be victors ever.
यस तस्तम्भ सहसा वि जमो अन्तान बर्हस्पतिस तरिषधस्थो रवेण|	him who with might hath propped earths ends who sitteth in threefold seat bṛhaspati with thunder.
तम परत्नास रषयो दीध्यानाः पुरो विप्रा दधिरे मन्द्रजिह्वम|	him of the pleasant tongue have ancient sages deepthinking holy singers set before them.
धुनेतयः सुप्रकेतम मदन्तो बर्हस्पते अभि ये नस ततस्रे|	wild in their course in wellmarked wise rejoicing were they bṛhaspati who pressed around us.
पर्षन्तं सर्प्रम अदब्धम ऊर्वम बर्हस्पते रक्षताद अस्य योनिम|	preserve bṛhaspati the stall uninjured this companys raining evermoving birthplace.
बर्हस्पते या परमा परावद अत आ त रतस्प्र्शो नि षेदुः|	bṛhaspati from thy remotest distance have they sat down who love the law eternal.
तुभ्यं खाता अवता अद्रिदुग्धा मध्व शचोतन्त्य अभितो विरप्शम|	for thee were dug wells springing from the mountain which murmuring round about pour streams of sweetness.
बर्हस्पतिः परथमं जायमानो महो जयोतिषः परमे वयोमन|	bṛhaspati when first he had his being from mighty splendour in supremest heaven.
सप्तास्यस तुविजातो रवेण वि सप्तरश्मिर अधमत तमांसि|	strong with his sevenfold mouth with noise of thunder with his seven rays blew and dispersed the darkness.
स सुष्टुभा स रक्वता गणेन वलं रुरोज फलिगं रवेण|	with the loudshouting band who sang his praises with thunder he destroyed obstructive vala.
बर्हस्पतिर उस्रिया हव्यसूदः कनिक्रदद वावशतीर उद आजत|	bṛhaspati thundering drave forth the cattle the lowing cows who make oblations ready.
एवा पित्रे विश्वदेवाय वर्ष्णे यज्ञैर विधेम नमसा हविर्भिः|	serve we with sacrifices gifts and homage even thus the steer of all the gods the father.
बर्हस्पते सुप्रजा वीरवन्तो वयं सयाम पतयो रयीणाम|	bṛhaspati may we be lords of riches with noble progeny and store of heroes.
स इद राजा परतिजन्यानि विश्वा शुष्मेण तस्थाव अभि वीर्य्ण|	surely that king by power and might heroic hath made him lord of all his foes possesions.
बर्हस्पतिं यः सुभ्र्तम बिभर्ति वल्गूयति वन्दते पूर्वभाजम|	who cherishes bṛhaspati welltended adorns and worships him as foremost sharer.
स इत कषेति सुधित ओकसि सवे तस्मा इळा पिन्वते विश्वदानीम|	in his own house he dwells in peace and comfort to him for ever holy food flows richly.
तस्मै विशः सवयम एवा नमन्ते यस्मिन बरह्मा राजनि पूर्व एति|	to him the people with free will pay homagethe king with whom the brahman hath precedence.
अप्रतीतो जयति सं धनानि परतिजन्यान्य उत या सजन्या|	he unopposed is master of the riches of his own subjects and of hostile people.
अवस्यवे यो वरिवः कर्णोति बरह्मणे राजा तम अवन्ति देवाः|	the gods uphold that king with their protection who helps the brahman when he seeks his favour.
इन्द्रश च सोमम पिबतम बर्हस्पते ऽसमिन यज्ञे मन्दसाना वर्षण्वसू|	indra bṛhaspati rainers of treasure rejoicing at this sacrifice drink the soma.
आ वां विशन्त्व इन्दवः सवाभुवो ऽसमे रयिं सर्ववीरं नि यछतम|	let the abundant drops sink deep within you vouchsafe us riches with full store of heroes.
बर्हस्पत इन्द्र वर्धतं नः सचा सा वां सुमतिर भूत्व अस्मे|	bṛhaspati and indra make us prosper may this be your benevolence to usward.
अविष्टं धियो जिग्र्तम पुरंधीर जजस्तम अर्यो वनुषाम अरातीः|	assist our holy thoughts wake up our spirit weaken the hatred of our foe and rivals.
दधिक्राव्ण इद उ नु चर्किराम विश्वा इन माम उषसः सूदयन्तु|	let us recite the praise of dadhikrāvan may all the mornings move me to exertion.
अपाम अग्नेर उषसः सूर्यस्य बर्हस्पतेर आङगिरसस्य जिष्णोः|	praise of the lord of waters dawn and agni bṛhaspati son of aṅgiras and sūrya.
सत्वा भरिषो गविषो दुवन्यसच छरवस्याद इष उषसस तुरण्यसत|	brave seeking war and booty dwelling with the good and with the swift may he hasten the food of dawn.
सत्यो दरवो दरवरः पतंगरो दधिक्रावेषम ऊर्जं सवर जनत|	may he the true the fleet the lover of the course the birdlike dadhikrāvan bring food strength and light.
उत समास्य दरवतस तुरण्यतः पर्णं न वेर अनु वाति परगर्धिनः|	his pinion rapid runner fans him m his way as of a bird that hastens onward to its aim.
शयेनस्येव धरजतो अङकसम परि दधिक्राव्णः सहोर्जा तरित्रतः|	and as it were a falcons gliding through the air strikes dadhikrāvans side as he speeds on with might.
उत सय वाजी कषिपणिं तुरण्यति गरीवायाम बद्धो अपिकक्ष आसनि|	bound by the neck and by the flanks and by the mouth the vigorous courser lends new swiftness to his speed.
करतुं दधिक्रा अनु संतवीत्वत पथाम अङकांस्य अन्व आपनीफणत|	drawing himself together as his strength allows dadhikrās springs along the windings of the paths.
हंसः शुचिषद वसुर अन्तरिक्षसद धोता वेदिषद अतिथिर दुरोणसत|	the haṁsa homed in light the vasu in midair the priest beside the altar in the house the guest.
नर्षद वरसद रतसद वयोमसद अब्जा गोजा रतजा अद्रिजा रतम|	dweller in noblest place mid men in truth in sky born of flood kine truth mountain he is holy law.
कया नश चित्र आ भुवद ऊती सदाव्र्धः सखा|	with what help will he come to us wonderful everwaxing friend.
कया शचिष्ठया वर्ता|	with what most mighty company.
कस तवा सत्यो मदानाम मंहिष्ठो मत्सद अन्धसः|	what genuine and most liberal draught will spirit thee with juice to burst.
दर्ळ्हा चिद आरुजे वसु|	open een stronglyguarded wealth.
अभी षु णः सखीनाम अविता जरित्णाम|	do thou who art protector of us thy friends who praise thee.
शतम भवास्य ऊतिभिः|	with hundred aids approach us.
अभी न आ वव्र्त्स्व चक्रं न वर्त्तम अर्वतः|	like as a coursers circling wheel so turn thee hitherward to us.
नियुद्भिश चर्षणीनाम|	attracted by the hymns of men.
परवता हि करतूनाम आ हा पदेव गछसि|	thou seekest as it were thine own stations with swift descent of powers.
अभक्षि सूर्ये सचा|	i share thee even with the sun.
सं यत त इन्द्र मन्यवः सं चक्राणि दधन्विरे|	what time thy courage and his wheels together indra run their course.
अध तवे अध सूर्ये|	with thee and with the sun alike.
उत समा हि तवाम आहुर इन मघवानं शचीपते|	so even lord of power and might the people call thee maghavan.
दातारम अविदीधयुम|	giver who pauses not to think.
उत समा सद्य इत परि शशमानाय सुन्वते|	and verily to him who toils and presses soma juice for thee.
पुरू चिन मंहसे वसु|	thou quickly givest ample wealth.
नहि षमा ते शतं चन राधो वरन्त आमुरः|	no not a hundred hinderers can check thy gracious bountys flow.
न चयौत्नानि करिष्यतः|	nor thy great deeds when thou wilt act.
अस्मां अवन्तु ते शतम अस्मान सहस्रम ऊतयः|	may thine assistance keep us safe thy hundred and thy thousand aids.
अस्मान विश्वा अभिष्टयः|	may all thy favours strengthen us.
अस्मां इहा वर्णीष्व सख्याय सवस्तये|	do thou elect us this place for friendship and prosperity.
महो राये दिवित्मते|	and great celestial opulence.
अस्मां अविड्ढि विश्वहेन्द्र राया परीणसा|	favour us indra evermore with overflowing store of wealth.
अस्मान विश्वाभिर ऊतिभिः|	with all thy succours aid thou us.
अस्मभ्यं तां अपा वर्धि वरजां अस्तेव गोमतः|	with new protections indra like an archer open thou for us.
नवाभिर इन्द्रोतिभिः|	the stables that are filled with kine.
अस्माकं धर्ष्णुया रथो दयुमां इन्द्रानपच्युतः|	our chariot indra boldly moves endued with splendour neer repulsed.
गव्युर अश्वयुर ईयते|	winning for us both kine and steeds.
अस्माकम उत्तमं कर्धि शरवो देवेषु सूर्य|	o sūrya make our fame to be most excellent among the gods.
वर्षिष्ठं दयाम इवोपरि|	most lofty as the heaven on high.
उप नो वाजा अध्वरम रभुक्षा देवा यात पथिभिर देवयानैः|	come to our sacrifice vājas Ṛbhukṣans gods by the paths which gods are wont to travel.
यथा यज्ञम मनुषो विक्ष्व आसु दधिध्वे रण्वाः सुदिनेष्व अह्नाम|	as ye gay gods accept in splendid weather the sacrifice among these folk of manus.
ते वो हर्दे मनसे सन्तु यज्ञा जुष्टासो अद्य घर्तनिर्णिजो गुः|	may these rites please you in your heart and spirit may the drops clothed in oil this day approach you.
पर वः सुतासो हरयन्त पूर्णाः करत्वे दक्षाय हर्षयन्त पीताः|	may the abundant juices bear you onward to power and strength and when imbibed delight you.
तर्युदायं देवहितं यथा व सतोमो वाजा रभुक्षणो ददे वः|	your threefold going near is godappointed so praise is given you vājas and Ṛbhukṣans.
जुह्वे मनुष्वद उपरासु विक्षु युष्मे सचा बर्हद्दिवेषु सोमम|	so manuslike mid younger folk i offer to you who are aloft in heaven the soma.
पीवोश्वाः शुचद्रथा हि भूतायःशिप्रा वाजिनः सुनिष्काः|	strong with fair chains of gold and jaws of iron ye have a splendid car and wellfed horses.
इन्द्रस्य सूनो शवसो नपातो ऽनु वश चेत्य अग्रियम मदाय|	ye sons of strength ye progeny of indra to you the best is offered to delight you.
रभुम रभुक्षणो रयिं वाजे वाजिन्तमं युजम|	Ṛbhukṣans him for handy wealth the mightiest comrade in the fight.
इन्द्रस्वन्तं हवामहे सदासातमम अश्विनम|	him indras equal we invoke most bounteous ever rich in steeds.
सेद रभवो यम अवथ यूयम इन्द्रश च मर्त्यम|	the mortal man whom Ṛbhus ye and indra favour with your help.
स धीभिर अस्तु सनिता मेधसाता सो अर्वता|	must be successful by his thoughts at sacrifice and with the steed.
वि नो वाजा रभुक्षणः पथश चितन यष्टवे|	o vājas and Ṛbhukṣans free for us the paths to sacrifice.
अस्मभ्यं सूरय सतुता विश्वा आशास तरीषणि|	ye princes lauded that we may press forward to each point of heaven.
तं नो वाजा रभुक्षण इन्द्र नासत्या रयिम|	o vājas and Ṛbhukṣans ye nāsatyas indra bless this wealth.
सम अश्वं चर्षणिभ्य आ पुरु शस्त मघत्तये|	and before other mens the steed that ample riches may be won.
अभूद देवः सविता वन्द्यो नु न इदानीम अह्न उपवाच्यो नर्भिः|	now must we praise and honour savitar the god at this time of the day the men must call to him.
वि यो रत्ना भजति मानवेभ्यः शरेष्ठं नो अत्र दरविणं यथा दधत|	him who distributes wealth to manus progeny that he may grant us here riches most excellent.
देवेभ्यो हि परथमं यज्ञियेभ्यो ऽमर्तत्वं सुवसि भागम उत्तमम|	for thou at first producest for the holy gods the noblest of all portions immortality.
आद इद दामानं सवितर वय ्र्णुषे ऽनूचीना जीविता मानुषेभ्यः|	thereafter as a gift to men o savitar thou openest existence life succeeding life.
अचित्ती यच चक्र्मा दैव्ये जने दीनैर दक्षैः परभूती पूरुषत्वता|	if we men as we are have sinned against the gods through want of thought in weakness or through insolence.
देवेषु च सवितर मानुषेषु च तवं नो अत्र सुवताद अनागसः|	absolve us from the guilt and make us free from sin o savitar alike among both gods and men.
न परमिये सवितुर दैव्यस्य तद यथा विश्वम भुवनं धारयिष्यति|	none may impede that power of savitar the god whereby he will maintain the universal world.
यत पर्थिव्या वरिमन्न आ सवङगुरिर वर्ष्मन दिवः सुवति सत्यम अस्य तत|	what the fairfingered god brings forth on earths expanse or in the height of heaven that work of his stands sure.
इन्द्रज्येष्ठान बर्हद्भ्यः पर्वतेभ्यः कषयां एभ्यः सुवसि पस्त्यावतः|	to lofty hills thou sendest those whom indra leads and givest fixed abodes with houses unto these.
यथायथा पतयन्तो वियेमिर एवैव तस्थुः सवितः सवाय ते|	however they may fly and draw themselves apart still savitar they stand obeying thy behest.
ये ते तरिर अहन सवितः सवासो दिवेदिवे सौभगम आसुवन्ति|	may the libations poured to thee thrice daily day after day o savitar bring us blessing.
इन्द्रो दयावाप्र्थिवी सिन्धुर अद्भिर आदित्यैर नो अदितिः शर्म यंसत|	may indra heaven earth sindhu with the waters aditi with Ādityas give us shelter.
एष सय भानुर उद इयर्ति युज्यते रथः परिज्मा दिवो अस्य सानवि|	yonder goes up that light your chariot is yoked that travels round upon the summit of this heaven.
पर्क्षासो अस्मिन मिथुना अधि तरयो दर्तिस तुरीयो मधुनो वि रप्शते|	within this car are stored three kindred shares of food and a skin filled with meath is rustling as the fourth.
उद वाम पर्क्षासो मधुमन्त ईरते रथा अश्वास उषसो वयुष्टिषु|	forth come your viands rich with store of pleasant meath and cars and horses at the flushing of the dawn.
अपोर्णुवन्तस तम आ परीव्र्तं सवर ण शुक्रं तन्वन्त आ रजः|	stripping the covering from the surrounded gloom and spreading through midair bright radiance like the sun.
मध्वः पिबतम मधुपेभिर आसभिर उत परियम मधुने युञ्जाथां रथम|	drink of the meath with lips accustomed to the draught harness for the meaths sake the chariot that ye love.
आ वर्तनिम मधुना जिन्वथस पथो दर्तिं वहेथे मधुमन्तम अश्विना|	refresh the way ye go refresh the paths with meath hither o aśvins bring the skin that holds the meath.
हंसासो ये वाम मधुमन्तो अस्रिधो हिरण्यपर्णा उहुव उषर्बुधः|	the swans ye have are friendly rich in store of meath goldpinioned strong to draw awake at early morn.
उदप्रुतो मन्दिनो मन्दिनिस्प्र्शो मध्वो न मक्षः सवनानि गछथः|	swimming the flood exultant fain for draughts that cheer ye come like flies to our libations of the meath.
सवध्वरासो मधुमन्तो अग्नय उस्रा जरन्ते परति वस्तोर अश्विना|	well knowing solemn rites and rich in meath the fires sing to the morning aśvins at the break of day.
यन निक्तहस्तस तरणिर विचक्षणः सोमं सुषाव मधुमन्तम अद्रिभिः|	when with pure hands the prudent energetic priest hath with the stones pressed out the soma rich in meath.
आकेनिपासो अहभिर दविध्वतः सवर ण शुक्रं तन्वन्त आ रजः|	the rays advancing nigh chasing with day the gloom spread through the firmament bright radiance like the sun.
सूरश चिद अश्वान युयुजान ईयते विश्वां अनु सवधया चेतथस पथः|	and the sun harnessing his horses goeth forth ye through your godlike nature let his paths be known.
पर वाम अवोचम अश्विना धियंधा रथः सवश्वो अजरो यो अस्ति|	devout in thought i have declared o aśvins your chariot with good steeds which lasts for ever.
येन सद्यः परि रजांसि याथो हविष्मन्तं तरणिम भोजम अछ|	wherewith ye travel swiftly through the regions to the prompt worshipper who brings oblation.
मही दयावाप्र्थिवी इह जयेष्ठे रुचा भवतां शुचयद्भिर अर्कैः|	may mighty heaven and earth most meet for honour be present here with light and gleaming splendours.
यत सीं वरिष्ठे बर्हती विमिन्वन रुवद धोक्षा पप्रथानेभिर एवैः|	when fixing them apart vast most extensive the steer roars loudly in farreaching courses.
देवी देवेभिर यजते यजत्रैर अमिनती तस्थतुर उक्षमाणे|	the goddesses with gods holy with holy the two stand pouring out their rain exhaustless.
रतावरी अद्रुहा देवपुत्रे यज्ञस्य नेत्री शुचयद्भिर अर्कैः|	faithful and guileless having gods for children leaders of sacrifice with shining splendours.
स इत सवपा भुवनेष्व आस य इमे दयावाप्र्थिवी जजान|	sure in the worlds he was a skilful craftsman he who produced these twain the earth and heaven.
उर्वी गभीरे रजसी सुमेके अवंशे धीरः शच्या सम ऐरत|	wise with his power he brought both realms together spacious and deep wellfashioned unsupported.
नू रोदसी बर्हद्भिर नो वरूथैः पत्नीवद्भिर इषयन्ती सजोषाः|	o heaven and earth with one accord promoting with high protection as of queens our welfare.
उरूची विश्वे यजते नि पातं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	farreaching universal holy guard us may we carborne through song be victors ever.
पर वाम महि दयवी अभ्य उपस्तुतिम भरामहे|	to both of you o heaven and earth we bring our lofty song of praise.
शुची उप परशस्तये|	pure ones to glorify you both.
पुनाने तन्वा मिथः सवेन दक्षेण राजथः|	ye sanctify each others form by your own proper might ye rule.
ऊह्याथे सनाद रतम|	and from of old observe the law.
मही मित्रस्य साधथस तरन्ती पिप्रती रतम|	furthering and fulfilling ye o mighty perfect mitras law.
परि यज्ञं नि षेदथुः|	ye sit around our sacrifice.
इहोप यात शवसो नपातः सौधन्वना रभवो माप भूत|	come hither o ye sons of strength ye Ṛbhus stay not afar ye children of sudhanvan.
अस्मिन हि वः सवने रत्नधेयं गमन्त्व इन्द्रम अनु वो मदासः|	at this libation is your gift of treasure let gladdening draughts approach you after indras.
आगन्न रभूणाम इह रत्नधेयम अभूत सोमस्य सुषुतस्य पीतिः|	hither is come the Ṛbhus gift of riches here was the drinking of the wellpressed soma.
सुक्र्त्यया यत सवपस्यया चं एकं विचक्र चमसं चतुर्धा|	since by dexterity and skill as craftsmen ye made the single chalice to be fourfold.
वय अक्र्णोत चमसं चतुर्धा सखे वि शिक्षेत्य अब्रवीत|	ye made fourfold the chalice that wag single ye spake these words and said o friend assist us.
अथैत वाजा अम्र्तस्य पन्थां गणं देवानाम रभवः सुहस्ताः|	then vājas gained the path of life eternal defthanded Ṛbhus to the gods assembly.
किम्मयः सविच चमस एष आस यं काव्येन चतुरो विचक्र|	out of what substance was that chalice fashioned which ye made fourfold by your art and wisdom.
अथा सुनुध्वं सवनम मदाय पात रभवो मधुनः सोम्यस्य|	now for the gladdening draught press out the liquor and drink o Ṛbhus of die meath of soma.
शच्याकर्त पितरा युवाना शच्याकर्त चमसं देवपानम|	ye with your cunning made your parents youthful the cup for gods to drink ye formed with cunning.
शच्या हरी धनुतराव अतष्टेन्द्रवाहाव रभवो वाजरत्नाः|	with cunning Ṛbhus rich in treasure fashioned the two swift tawny steeds who carry indra.
यो वः सुनोत्य अभिपित्वे अह्नां तीव्रं वाजासः सवनम मदाय|	whoso pours out for you when days are closing the sharp libation for your joy o vājas.
तस्मै रयिम रभवः सर्ववीरम आ तक्षत वर्षणो मन्दसानाः|	for him o mighty Ṛbhus ye rejoicing have fashioned wealth with plenteous store of heroes.
परातः सुतम अपिबो हर्यश्व माध्यंदिनं सवनं केवलं ते|	lord of bay steeds at dawn the juice thou drankest thine only thine is the noonday libation.
सम रभुभिः पिबस्व रत्नधेभिः सखींर यां इन्द्र चक्र्षे सुक्र्त्या|	now drink thou with the wealthbestowing Ṛbhus whom for their skill thou madest friends o indra.
ये देवासो अभवता सुक्र्त्या शयेना इवेद अधि दिवि निषेद|	ye whom your artist skill hath raised to godhead have set you down above in heaven like falcons.
ते रत्नं धात शवसो नपातः सौधन्वना अभवताम्र्तासः|	so give us riches children of sudhanvan o sons of strength ye have become immortal.
यत तर्तीयं सवनं रत्नधेयम अक्र्णुध्वं सवपस्या सुहस्ताः|	the third libation that bestoweth treasure which ye have won by skill ye dexteroushanded.
तद रभवः परिषिक्तं व एतत सम मदेभिर इन्द्रियेभिः पिबध्वम|	this drink hath been effused for you o Ṛbhus  drink it with high delight with joy like indras.
पर रभुभ्यो दूतम इव वाचम इष्य उपस्तिरे शवैतरीं धेनुम ईळे|	i send my voice as herald to the Ṛbhus i crave the white cow for the overspreading.
ये वातजूतास तरणिभिर एवैः परि दयां सद्यो अपसो बभूवुः|	windsped the skillful ones in rapid motion have in an instant compassed round the heaven.
यदारम अक्रन्न रभवः पित्र्भ्याम परिविष्टी वेषणा दंसनाभिः|	what time the rbus had with care and marvels done proper service to assist their parents.
आद इद देवानाम उप सख्यम आयन धीरासः पुष्टिम अवहन मनायै|	they won the friendship of the gods the sages carried away the fruit of their devotion.
पुनर ये चक्रुः पितरा युवाना सना यूपेव जरणा शयाना|	may they who made their parents who were lying like posts that moulder young again for ever.
ते वाजो विभ्वां रभुर इन्द्रवन्तो मधुप्सरसो नो ऽवन्तु यज्ञम|	may vāja vibhvan Ṛbhu joined with indra  protect our sacrifice the somalovers.
यत संवत्सम रभवो गाम अरक्षन यत संवत्सम रभवो मा अपिंशन|	as for a year the Ṛbhus kept the milchcow throughout a year fashioned and formed her body.
यत संवत्सम अभरन भासो अस्यास ताभिः शमीभिर अम्र्तत्वम आशुः|	and through a years space still sustained her brightness through these their labours they were made immortal.
जयेष्ठ आह चमसा दवा करेति कनीयान तरीन कर्णवामेत्य आह|	two beakers let us makethus said the eldest let us make threethis was the youngers sentence.
कनिष्ठ आह चतुरस करेति तवष्ट रभवस तत पनयद वचो वः|	four beakers let us makethus spoke the youngest tvaṣṭar approved this rede of yours o Ṛbhus.
सत्यम ऊचुर नर एवा हि चक्रुर अनु सवधाम रभवो जग्मुर एताम|	the men spake truth and even so they acted this godlike way of theirs the Ṛbhus followed.
विभ्राजमानांश चमसां अहेवावेनत तवष्टा चतुरो दद्र्श्वान|	and tvaṣṭar when he looked on the four beakers resplendent as the day was moved with envy.
दवादश दयून यद अगोह्यस्यातिथ्ये रणन्न रभवः ससन्तः|	when for twelve days the Ṛbhus joyed reposing as guests of him who never may be hidden.
सुक्षेत्राक्र्ण्वन्न अनयन्त सिन्धून धन्वातिष्ठन्न ओषधीर निम्नम आपः|	they made fair fertile fields they brought the rivers plants spread oer deserts waters filled the hollows.
रथं ये चक्रुः सुव्र्तं नरेष्ठां ये धेनुं विश्वजुवं विश्वरूपाम|	may they who formed the swift car bearing heroes and the cow omniform and allimpelling.
त आ तक्षन्त्व रभवो रयिं नः सववसः सवपसः सुहस्ताः|	even may they form wealth for usthe Ṛbhus dexteroushanded deft in work and gracious.
अपो हय एषाम अजुषन्त देवा अभि करत्वा मनसा दीध्यानाः|	so in their work the gods had satisfaction pondering it with thought and mental insight.
वाजो देवानाम अभवत सुकर्मेन्द्रस्य रभुक्षा वरुणस्य विभ्वा|	the gods expert artificer was vāja indras Ṛbhukṣan varuṇas was vibhvan.
ये हरी मेधयोक्था मदन्त इन्द्राय चक्रुः सुयुजा ये अश्वा|	they who made glad with sacrifice and praises wrought the two bays his docile steeds for indra.
ते रायस पोषं दरविणान्य अस्मे धत्त रभवः कषेमयन्तो न मित्रम|	Ṛbhus as those who wish a friend to prosper bestow upon us gear and growth of riches.
इदाह्नः पीतिम उत वो मदं धुर न रते शरान्तस्य सख्याय देवाः|	this day have they set gladdening drink before you not without toil are gods inclined to friendship.
ते नूनम अस्मे रभवो वसूनि तर्तीये अस्मिन सवने दधात|	therefore do ye who are so great o Ṛbhus vouchsafe us treasures at this third libation.
यस तवाम अग्न इनधते यतस्रुक तरिस ते अन्नं कर्णवत सस्मिन्न अहन|	whoso enkindles thee with lifted ladle and thrice this day offers thee food o agni.
स सु दयुम्नैर अभ्य अस्तु परसक्षत तव करत्वा जातवेदश चिकित्वान|	may he excel triumphant through thy splendours wise through thy mental power o jātavedas.
इध्मं यस ते जभरच छश्रमाणो महो अग्ने अनीकम आ सपर्यन|	whoso with toil and trouble brings thee fuel serving the majesty of mighty agni.
स इधानः परति दोषाम उषासम पुष्यन रयिं सचते घनन्न अमित्रान|	he kindling thee at evening and at morning prospers and comes to wealth and slays his foemen.
अग्निर ईशे बर्हतः कषत्रियस्याग्निर वाजस्य परमस्य रायः|	agni is master of sublime dominion agni is lord of strength and lofty riches.
दधाति रत्नं विधते यविष्ठो वय आनुषङ मर्त्याय सवधावान|	straightway the selfreliant god most youthful gives treasures to the mortal who adores him.
यच चिद धि ते पुरुषत्रा यविष्ठाचित्तिभिश चक्र्मा कच चिद आगः|	most youthful god whatever sin through folly we here as human beings have committed.
कर्धी षव अस्मां अदितेर अनागान वय एनांसि शिश्रथो विष्वग अग्ने|	in sight of aditi make thou us sinless remit entirely agni our offences.
महश चिद अग्न एनसो अभीक ऊर्वाद देवानाम उत मर्त्यानाम|	even in the presence of great sin o agni free us from prison of the gods or mortals.
मा ते सखायः सदम इद रिषाम यछा तोकाय तनयाय शं योः|	never may we who are thy friends be injured grant health and strength unto our seed and offspring.
यथा ह तयद वसवो गौर्यं चित पदि षिताम अमुञ्चता यजत्राः|	even as ye here gods excellent and holy have loosed the cow that by the foot was tethered.
एवो षव अस्मन मुञ्चता वय अंहः पर तार्य अग्ने परतरं न आयुः|	so also set us free from this affliction long let our life o agni be extended.
आ यात्व इन्द्रो ऽवस उप न इह सतुतः सधमाद अस्तु शूरः|	may indra come to us for our protection here be the hero praised our feastcompanion.
वाव्र्धानस तविषीर यस्य पूर्वीर दयौर न कषत्रम अभिभूति पुष्यात|	may he whose powers are many waxen mighty cherish like dyaus his own supreme dominion.
तस्येद इह सतवथ वर्ष्ण्यानि तुविद्युम्नस्य तुविराधसो नॄन|	here magnify his great heroic exploits most glorious one enriching men with bounties.
यस्य करतुर विदथ्यो न सम्राट साह्वान तरुत्रो अभ्य अस्ति कर्ष्टीः|	whose will is like a sovran in assembly who rules the people conqueror allsurpassing.
आ यात्व इन्द्रो दिव आ पर्थिव्या मक्षू समुद्राद उत वा पुरीषात|	hither let indra come from earth or heaven hither with speech from firmament or ocean.
सवर्णराद अवसे नो मरुत्वान परावतो वा सदनाद रतस्य|	with maruts from the realm of light to aid us or from a distance from the seat of order.
सथूरस्य रायो बर्हतो य ईशे तम उ षटवाम विदथेष्व इन्द्रम|	that indra will we laud in our assemblies him who is lord of great and lasting riches.
यो वायुना जयति गोमतीषु पर धर्ष्णुया नयति वस्यो अछ|	victor with vāyu where the herds are gathered who leads with boldness on to higher fortune.
उप यो नमो नमसि सतभायन्न इयर्ति वाचं जनयन यजध्यै|	may the priest lord of many blessings strivingwho fixing reverence on reverence giving.
रञ्जसानः पुरुवार उक्थैर एन्द्रं कर्ण्वीत सदनेषु होता|	vent to his voice inciteth men to worshipwith lauds bring indra hither to our dwellings.
धिषा यदि धिषण्यन्तः सरण्यान सदन्तो अद्रिम औशिजस्य गोहे|	when sitting pondering in deep devotion in auśijas abode they ply the pressstone.
आ दुरोषाः पास्त्यस्य होता यो नो महान संवरणेषु वह्निः|	may he whose wrath is fierce the mighty bearer come as the houselords priest within our chambers.
सत्रा यद ईम भार्वरस्य वर्ष्णः सिषक्ति शुष्म सतुवते भराय|	surely the power of bhārvara the mighty for ever helpeth to support the singer.
गुहा यद ईम औशिजस्य गोहे पर यद धिये परायसे मदाय|	that which in auśijas abode lies hidden to come forth for delight and for devotion.
वि यद वरांसि पर्वतस्य वर्ण्वे पयोभिर जिन्वे अपां जवांसि|	when he unbars the spaces of the mountains and quickens with his floods the watertorrents.
विदद गौरस्य गवयस्य गोहे यदी वाजाय सुध्यो वहन्ति|	he finds in lair the buffalo and wildox when the wise lead him on to vigorous exploit.
भद्रा ते हस्ता सुक्र्तोत पाणी परयन्तारा सतुवते राध इन्द्र|	auspicious are thy hands thine arms wellfashioned which proffer bounty indra to thy praiser.
का ते निषत्तिः किम उ नो ममत्सि किं नोदउद उ हर्षसे दातवा उ|	what sloth is this why dost thou not rejoice thee why dost thou not delight thyself with giving.
एवा वस्व इन्द्रः सत्यः सम्राड ढन्ता वर्त्रं वरिवः पूरवे कः|	so indra is the truthful lord of treasure freedom he gave to man by slaying vṛtra.
पुरुष्टुत करत्वा नः शग्धि रायो भक्षीय ते ऽवसो दैव्यस्य|	muchlauded help us with thy power to riches may i be sharer of thy godlike favour.
नू षटुत इन्द्र नू गर्णान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो न पीपेः|	now indra lauded glorified with praises let power swell high like rivers for the singer.
अकारि ते हरिवो बरह्म नव्यं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	for thee a new hymn lord of bays is fashioned may we careborne through song be victors ever.
कथा महाम अव्र्धत कस्य होतुर यज्ञं जुषाणो अभि सोमम ऊधः|	how what priests sacrifice hath he made mighty rejoicing in the soma and its fountain.
पिबन्न उशानो जुषमाणो अन्धो ववक्ष रष्वः शुचते धनाय|	delighting in juice eagerly drinking the lofty one hath waxed for splendid riches.
को अस्य वीरः सधमादम आप सम आनंश सुमतिभिः को अस्य|	what hero hath been made his feastcompanion who hath been partner in his lovingkindness.
कद अस्य चित्रं चिकिते कद ऊती वर्धे भुवच छशमानस्य यज्योः|	what know we of his wondrous acts how often comes he to aid and speed the pious toiler.
कथा शर्णोति हूयमानम इन्द्रः कथा शर्ण्वन्न अवसाम अस्य वेद|	how heareth indra offered invocation how hearing marketh he the invokers wishes.
का अस्य पूर्वीर उपमातयो ह कथैनम आहुः पपुरिं जरित्रे|	what are his ancient acts of bounty wherefore call they him one who filleth full the singer.
कथा सबाधः शशमानो अस्य नशद अभि दरविणं दीध्यानः|	how doth the priest who laboureth ever longing win for himself the wealth which he possesseth.
देवो भुवन नवेदा म रतानां नमो जग्र्भ्वां अभि यज जुजोषत|	may he the god mark well my truthful praises having received the homage which he loveth.
कथा कद अस्या उषसो वयुष्टौ देवो मर्तस्य सख्यं जुजोष|	how and what bond of friendship with a mortal hath the god chosen as this morn is breaking.
कथा कद अस्य सख्यं सखिभ्यो ये अस्मिन कामं सुयुजं ततस्रे|	how and what love hath he for those who love him who have entwined in him their firm affection.
किम आद अमत्रं सख्यं सखिभ्यः कदा नु ते भरात्रम पर बरवाम|	is then thy friendship with thy friends most mighty thy brotherhood with uswhen may we tell it.
शरिये सुद्र्शो वपुर अस्य सर्गाः सवर ण चित्रतमम इष आ गोः|	the streams of milk move as most wondrous sunlight the beauty of the lovely one for glory.
दरुहं जिघांसन धवरसम अनिन्द्रां तेतिक्ते तिग्मा तुजसे अनीका|	about to stay the indraless destructive spirit he sharpens his keen arms to strike her.
रणा चिद यत्र रणया न उग्रो दूरे अज्ञाता उषसो बबाधे|	whereby the strong although our debts exactor drives in the distant mornings that we know not.
रतस्य हि शुरुधः सन्ति पूर्वीर रतस्य धीतिर वर्जिनानि हन्ति|	eternal law hath varied food that strengthens thought of eternal law removes transgressions.
रतस्य शलोको बधिरा ततर्द कर्णा बुधानः शुचमान आयोः|	the praisehymn of eternal law arousing glowing hath oped the deaf ears of the living.
रतस्य दर्ळ्हा धरुणानि सन्ति पुरूणि चन्द्रा वपुषे वपूंषि|	firmseated are eternal laws foundations in its fair form are many splendid beauties.
रतेन दीर्घम इषणन्त पर्क्ष रतेन गाव रतम आ विवेशुः|	by holy law long lasting food they bring us by holy law have cows come to our worship.
रतं येमान रतम इद वनोत्य रतस्य शुष्मस तुरया उ गव्युः|	fixing eternal law he too upholds it swift moves the might of law and wins the booty.
रताय पर्थ्वी बहुले गभीरे रताय धेनू परमे दुहाते|	to law belong the vast deep earth and heaven milchkine supreme to law their milk they render.
नू षटुत इन्द्र नू गर्णान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो न पीपेः|	now indra laudedglorified with praises let power swell high like rivers to the singer.
अकारि ते हरिवो बरह्म नव्यं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	for thee a new hymn lord of bays is fashioned may we carborne through song be victors ever.
अग्रम पिबा मधूनां सुतं वायो दिविष्टिषु|	drink the best draught of somajuice o vāyu at our holy rites.
तवं हि पूर्वपा असि|	for thou art he who drinketh first.
शतेना नो अभिष्टिभिर नियुत्वां इन्द्रसारथिः|	come teamdrawn with thy hundred helps with indra seated in the car.
वायो सुतस्य तर्म्पतम|	vāyu and drink your fill of juice.
आ वां सहस्रं हरय इन्द्रवायू अभि परयः|	may steeds a thousand bring you both indra and vāyu hitherward.
वहन्तु सोमपीतये|	to drink the soma to the feast.
रथं हिरण्यवन्धुरम इन्द्रवायू सवध्वरम|	for ye o indravāyu mount the goldenseated car that aids.
आ हि सथाथो दिविस्प्र्शम|	the sacrifice that reaches heaven.
रथेन पर्थुपाजसा दाश्वांसम उप गछतम|	on farrefulgent chariot come unto the man who offers gifts.
इन्द्रवायू इहा गतम|	come indravāyu hitherward.
इन्द्रवायू अयं सुतस तं देवेभिः सजोषसा|	here indravāyu is the juice drink it accordant with the gods.
पिबतं दाशुषो गर्हे|	within the givers dwellingplace.
इह परयाणम अस्तु वाम इन्द्रवायू विमोचनम|	hither o indravāyu be your journey here unyoke your steeds.
इह वां सोमपीतये|	here for your draught of soma juice.
रभुर विभ्वा वाज इन्द्रो नो अछेमं यज्ञं रत्नधेयोप यात|	to this our sacrifice come Ṛbhu vibhvan vāja and indra with the gift of riches.
इदा हि वो धिषणा देव्य अह्नाम अधात पीतिं सम मदा अग्मता वः|	because this day hath dhiṣaṇā the goddess set drink for you the gladdening draughts have reached you.
विदानासो जन्मनो वाजरत्ना उत रतुभिर रभवो मादयध्वम|	knowing your birth and rich in gathered treasure Ṛbhus rejoice together with the Ṛtus.
सं वो मदा अग्मत सम पुरंधिः सुवीराम अस्मे रयिम एरयध्वम|	the gladdening draughts and wisdom have approached you send ye us riches with good store of heroes.
अयं वो यज्ञ रभवो ऽकारि यम आ मनुष्वत परदिवो दधिध्वे|	for you was made this sacrifice o Ṛbhus which ye like men won for yourselves aforetime.
पर वो ऽछा जुजुषाणासो अस्थुर अभूत विश्वे अग्रियोत वाजाः|	to you come all who find in you their pleasure ye all wereeven the two eldervājas.
अभूद उ वो विधते रत्नधेयम इदा नरो दाशुषे मर्त्याय|	now for the mortal worshipper o heroes for him who served you was the gift of riches.
पिबत वाजा रभवो ददे वो महि तर्तीयं सवनम मदाय|	drink vājas Ṛbhus unto you is offered to gladden you the third and great libation.
आ वाजा यातोप न रभुक्षा महो नरो दरविणसो गर्णानाः|	come to us heroes vājas and Ṛbhukṣans glorified for the sake of mighty treasure.
आ वः पीतयो ऽभिपित्वे अह्नाम इमा अस्तं नवस्व इव गमन|	these draughts approach you as the day is closing as cows whose calves are newlyborn their stable.
आ नपातः शवसो यातनोपेमं यज्ञं नमसा हूयमानाः|	come to this sacrifice of ours ye children of strength invoked with humble adoration.
सजोषसः सूरयो यस्य च सथ मध्वः पात रत्नधा इन्द्रवन्तः|	drink of this meath wealthgivers joined with indra with whom ye are in full accord ye princes.
सजोषा इन्द्र वरुणेन सोमं सजोषाः पाहि गिर्वणो मरुद्भिः|	close knit with varuṇa drink the soma indra closeknit hymnlover with the maruts drink it.
अग्रेपाभिर रतुपाभिः सजोषा गनास्पत्नीभी रत्नधाभिः सजोषाः|	closeknit with drinkers first who drink in season closeknit with heavenly dames who give us treasures.
सजोषस आदित्यैर मादयध्वं सजोषस रभवः पर्वतेभिः|	rejoice in full accord with the Ādityas in concord with the parvatas o Ṛbhus.
सजोषसो दैव्येना सवित्रा सजोषसः सिन्धुभी रत्नधेभिः|	in full accord with savitar divine one in full accord with floods that pour forth riches.
ये अश्विना ये पितरा य ऊती धेनुं ततक्षुर रभवो ये अश्वा|	Ṛbhus who helped their parents and the aśvins who formed the milchcow and the pair of horses.
ये अंसत्रा य रधग रोदसी ये विभ्वो नरः सवपत्यानि चक्रुः|	made armour set the heaven and earth asunderfar reaching heroes they have made good offspring.
ये गोमन्तं वाजवन्तं सुवीरं रयिं धत्थ वसुमन्तम पुरुक्षुम|	ye who have wealth in cattle and in booty in heroes in rich sustenance and treasure.
ते अग्रेपा रभवो मन्दसाना अस्मे धत्त ये च रातिं गर्णन्ति|	such o ye Ṛbhus first to drink rejoicing give unto us and those who laud our present.
नापाभूत न वो ऽतीत्र्षामानिःशस्ता रभवो यज्ञे अस्मिन|	ye were not far we have not left you thirsting blameless in this our sacrifice o Ṛbhus.
सम इन्द्रेण मदथ सम मरुद्भिः सं राजभी रत्नधेयाय देवाः|	rejoice you with the maruts and with indra with the kings gods that ye may give us riches.
अग्ने मर्ळ महां असि य ईम आ देवयुं जनम|	agni show favour great art thou who to this pious man art come.
इयेथ बर्हिर आसदम|	to seat thee on the sacred grass.
स मानुषीषु दूळभो विक्षु परावीर अमर्त्यः|	may he the immortal helper bard to be deceived among mankind.
दूतो विश्वेषाम भुवत|	become the messenger of all.
स सद्म परि णीयते होता मन्द्रो दिविष्टिषु|	around the altar is he led welcome chief priest at solemn rites.
उत पोता नि षीदति|	or as the potar sits him down.
उत गना अग्निर अध्वर उतो गर्हपतिर दमे|	agni in fire at sacrifice and in the house as lord thereof.
उत बरह्मा नि षीदति|	and as a brahman takes his seat.
वेषि हय अध्वरीयताम उपवक्ता जनानाम|	thou comest as the guide of folk who celebrate a sacrifice.
हव्या च मानुषाणाम|	and to oblations brought by men.
वेषीद व अस्य दूत्यं यस्य जुजोषो अध्वरम|	thou servest as his messenger whose sacrifice thou lovest well.
हव्यम मर्तस्य वोळ्हवे|	to bear the mortals gifts to heaven.
अस्माकं जोष्य अध्वरम अस्माकं यज्ञम अङगिरः|	accept our solemn rite be pleased aṅgiras with our sacrifice.
अस्माकं शर्णुधी हवम|	give ear and listen to our call.
परि ते दूळभो रथो ऽसमां अश्नोतु विश्वतः|	may thine inviolable car wherewith thou guardest those who give.
येन रक्षसि दाशुषः|	come near to us from every side.
कर्णुष्व पाजः परसितिं न पर्थ्वीं याहि राजेवामवां इभेन|	put forth like a widespreading net thy vigour go like a mighty king with his attendants.
तर्ष्वीम अनु परसितिं दरूणानो ऽसतासि विध्य रक्षसस तपिष्ठैः|	thou following thy swift net shootest arrows transfix the fiends with darts that burn most fiercely.
तव भरमास आशुया पतन्त्य अनु सप्र्श धर्षता शोशुचानः|	forth go in rapid flight thy whirling weapons follow them closely glowing in thy fury.
तपूंष्य अग्ने जुह्वा पतंगान असंदितो वि सर्ज विष्वग उल्काः|	spread with thy tongue the winged flames o agni unfettered cast thy firebrands all around thee.
परति सपशो वि सर्ज तूर्णितमो भवा पायुर विशो अस्या अदब्धः|	send thy spies forward fleetest in thy motion be neer deceived the guardian of this people.
यो नो दूरे अघशंसो यो अन्त्य अग्ने माकिष टे वयथिर आ दधर्षीत|	from him who near or far is bent on evil and let no trouble sent from thee oercome us.
उद अग्ने तिष्ठ परत्य आ तनुष्व नय अमित्रां ओषतात तिग्महेते|	rise up o agni spread thee out before us burn down our foes thou who hast sharpened arrows.
यो नो अरातिं समिधान चक्रे नीचा तं धक्ष्य अतसं न शुष्कम|	him blazing agni who hath worked us mischief consume thou utterly like driedup stubble.
ऊर्ध्वो भव परति विध्याध्य अस्मद आविष कर्णुष्व दैव्यान्य अग्ने|	rise agni drive off those who fight against us make manifest thine own celestial vigour.
अव सथिरा तनुहि यातुजूनां जामिम अजामिम पर मर्णीहि शत्रून|	slacken the strong bows of the demondriven destroy our foemen whether kin or stranger.
स ते जानाति सुमतिं यविष्ठ य ईवते बरह्मणे गातुम ऐरत|	most youthful god he knoweth well thy favour who gave an impulse to this high devotion.
विश्वान्य अस्मै सुदिनानि रायो दयुम्नान्य अर्यो वि दुरो अभि दयौत|	all fair days and magnificence of riches hast thou beamed forth upon the good mans portals.
सेद अग्ने अस्तु सुभगः सुदानुर यस तवा नित्येन हविषा य उक्थैः|	blest agni be the man the liberal giver who with his lauds and regular oblation.
पिप्रीषति सव आयुषि दुरोणे विश्वेद अस्मै सुदिना सासद इष्टिः|	is fain to please thee for his life and dwelling may all his days be bright be this his longing.
अर्चामि ते सुमतिं घोष्य अर्वाक सं ते वावाता जरताम इयं गीः|	i praise thy gracious favour sing in answer may this my song sing like a loved one with thee.
सवश्वास तवा सुरथा मर्जयेमास्मे कषत्राणि धारयेर अनु दयून|	lords of good steeds and cars may we adorn thee and day by day vouchsafe thou us dominion.
इह तवा भूर्य आ चरेद उप तमन दोषावस्तर दीदिवांसम अनु दयून|	here of free choice let each one serve thee richly resplendent day by day at eve and morning.
करीळन्तस तवा सुमनसः सपेमाभि दयुम्ना तस्थिवांसो जनानाम|	so may we honour thee content and joyous passing beyond the glories of the people.
यस तवा सवश्वः सुहिरण्यो अग्न उपयाति वसुमता रथेन|	whoso with good steeds and fine gold o agni comes nigh thee on a car laden with treasure.
तस्य तराता भवसि तस्य सखा यस त आतिथ्यम आनुषग जुजोषत|	his friend art thou yea thou art his protector whose joy it is to entertain thee duly.
महो रुजामि बन्धुता वचोभिस तन मा पितुर गोतमाद अन्व इयाय|	through words and kinship i destroy the mighty this power i have from gotama my father.
तवं नो अस्य वचसश चिकिद्धि होतर यविष्ठ सुक्रतो दमूनाः|	mark thou this speech of ours o thou most youthful friend of the house exceeding wise invoker.
अस्वप्नजस तरणयः सुशेवा अतन्द्रासो ऽवर्का अश्रमिष्ठाः|	knowing no slumber speedy and propitious alert and ever friendly most unwearied.
ते पायवः सध्र्यञ्चो निषद्याग्ने तव नः पान्त्व अमूर|	may thy protecting powers unerring agni taking their places here combined preserve us.
ये पायवो मामतेयं ते अग्ने पश्यन्तो अन्धं दुरिताद अरक्षन|	thy guardian rays o agni when they saw him preserved blind māmateya from affliction.
ररक्ष तान सुक्र्तो विश्ववेदा दिप्सन्त इद रिपवो नाह देभुः|	lord of all riches he preserved the pious the fees who fain would harm them did no mischief.
तवया वयं सधन्यस तवोतास तव परणीत्य अश्याम वाजान|	aided by thee with thee may we be wealthy may we gain strength with thee to guide us onward.
उभा शंसा सूदय सत्यताते ऽनुष्ठुया कर्णुह्य अह्रयाण|	fulfil the words of both o ever truthful straightway do this thou god whom power emboldens.
अया ते अग्ने समिधा विधेम परति सतोमं शस्यमानं गर्भाय|	o agni with this fuel will we serve thee accept the laud we sing to thee with favour.
दहाशसो रक्षसः पाह्य अस्मान दरुहो निदो मित्रमहो अवद्यात|	destroy the cursing rākṣasas preserve us o rich in friends from guile and scorn and slander.
आ सत्यो यातु मघवां रजीषी दरवन्त्व अस्य हरय उप नः|	impetuous true let maghavan come hither and let his tawny coursers speed to reach us.
तस्मा इद अन्धः सुषुमा सुदक्षम इहाभिपित्वं करते गर्णानः|	for him have we pressed juice exceeding potent here praised with song let him effect his visit.
अव सय शूराध्वनो नान्ते ऽसमिन नो अद्य सवने मन्दध्यै|	unyoke as at thy journeys end o hero to gladden thee today at this libation.
शंसात्य उक्थम उशनेव वेधाश चिकितुषे असुर्याय मन्म|	like uśanā the priest a laud shall utter a hymn to thee the lord divine who markest.
कविर न निण्यं विदथानि साधन वर्षा यत सेकं विपिपानो अर्चात|	when the bull quaffing praises our libation as a sage paying holy rites in secret.
दिव इत्था जीजनत सप्त कारून अह्ना चिच चक्रुर वयुना गर्णन्तः|	seven singers here from heaven hath he begotten who een by day have wrought their works while singing.
सवर यद वेदि सुद्र्शीकम अर्कैर महि जयोती रुरुचुर यद ध वस्तोः|	when heavens fair light by hymns was made apparent they made great splendour shine at break of morning.
अन्धा तमांसि दुधिता विचक्षे नर्भ्यश चकार नर्तमो अभिष्टौ|	he with his succour best of heroes scattered the blinding darkness so that men saw clearly.
ववक्ष इन्द्रो अमितम रजीष्य उभे आ पप्रौ रोदसी महित्वा|	indra impetuous one hath waxed immensely he with his vastness hath filled earth and heaven.
अतश चिद अस्य महिमा वि रेच्य अभि यो विश्वा भुवना बभूव|	een beyond this his majesty extendeth who hath exceeded all the worlds in greatness.
विश्वानि शक्रो नर्याणि विद्वान अपो रिरेच सखिभिर निकामैः|	Śakra who knoweth well all human actions hath with his eager friends let loose the waters.
अश्मानं चिद ये बिभिदुर वचोभिर वरजं गोमन्तम उशिजो वि वव्रुः|	they with their songs cleft een the mountain open and willingly disclosed the stall of cattle.
अपो वर्त्रं वव्रिवांसम पराहन परावत ते वज्रम पर्थिवी सचेताः|	he smote away the floods obstructer vṛtra earth conscious lent her aid to speed thy thunder.
परार्णांसि समुद्रियाण्य ऐनोः पतिर भवञ छवसा शूर धर्ष्णो|	thou sentest forth the waters of the ocean as lord through power and might o daring hero.
अपो यद अद्रिम पुरुहूत दर्दर आविर भुवत सरमा पूर्व्यं ते|	when muchinvoked the waters rock thou cleftest saramā showed herself and went before thee.
स नो नेता वाजम आ दर्षि भूरिं गोत्रा रुजन्न अङगिरोभिर गर्णानः|	hymned by aṅgirases bursting the cowstalls much strength thou foundest for us as our leader.
अछा कविं नर्मणो गा अभिष्टौ सवर्षाता मघवन नाधमानम|	come maghavan friend of man to aid the singer imploring thee in battle for the sunlight.
ऊतिभिस तम इषणो दयुम्नहूतौ नि मायावान अब्रह्मा दस्युर अर्त|	speed him with help in his inspired invokings down sink the sorcerer the prayerless dasyu.
आ दस्युघ्ना मनसा याह्य अस्तम भुवत ते कुत्सः सख्ये निकामः|	come to our home resolved to slay the dasyu kutsa longed eagerly to win thy friendship.
सवे योनौ नि षदतं सरूपा वि वां चिकित्सद रतचिद ध नारी|	alike in form ye both sate in his dwelling the faithful lady was in doubt between you.
यासि कुत्सेन सरथम अवस्युस तोदो वातस्य हर्योर ईशानः|	thou comest fain to succour him with kutsaa goad that masters both the windgods horses.
रज्रा वाजं न गध्यं युयूषन कविर यद अहन पार्याय भूषात|	that holding the brown steeds like spoil for capture the sage may on the final day be present.
कुत्साय शुष्णम अशुषं नि बर्हीः परपित्वे अह्नः कुयवं सहस्रा|	for kutsa with thy thousand thou at daybreak didst hurl down greedy Śuṣṇa foe of harvest.
सद्यो दस्यून पर मर्ण कुत्स्येन पर सूरश चक्रं वर्हताद अभीके|	quickly with kutsas friend destroy the dasyus and roll the chariotwheel of sūrya near us.
तवम पिप्रुम मर्गयं शूशुवांसम रजिश्वने वैदथिनाय रन्धीः|	thou to the son of vidathin Ṛjiśvan gavest up mighty mṛgaya and pipru.
पञ्चाशत कर्ष्णा नि वपः सहस्रात्कं न पुरो जरिमा वि दर्दः|	thou smotest down the swarthy fifty thousand and rentest forts as age consumes a garment.
सूर उपाके तन्वं दधानो वि यत ते चेत्य अम्र्तस्य वर्पः|	what time thou settest near the sun thy body thy form immortal one is seen expanding.
मर्गो न हस्ती तविषीम उषाणः सिंहो न भीम आयुधानि बिभ्रत|	thou a wild elephant with might invested like a dread lion as thou wieldest weapons.
इन्द्रं कामा वसूयन्तो अग्मन सवर्मीळ्हे न सवने चकानाः|	wishes for wealth have gone to indra longing for him in war for light and at libation.
शरवस्यवः शशमानास उक्थैर ओको न रण्वा सुद्र्शीव पुष्टिः|	eager for glory labouring with praisesongs he is like home like sweet and fair nutrition.
तम इद व इन्द्रं सुहवं हुवेम यस ता चकार नर्या पुरूणि|	call we for you that indra prompt to listen him who hath done so much for mens advantage.
यो मावते जरित्रे गध्यं चिन मक्षू वाजम भरति सपार्हराधाः|	who lord of envied bounty to a singer like me brings quickly booty worth the capture.
तिग्मा यद अन्तर अशनिः पताति कस्मिञ चिच छूर मुहुके जनानाम|	when the sharppointed arrow o thou hero flieth mid any conflict of the people.
घोरा यद अर्य सम्र्तिर भवात्य अध समा नस तन्वो बोधि गोपाः|	when faithful one the dread encounter cometh then be thou the protector of our body.
भुवो ऽविता वामदेवस्य धीनाम भुवः सखाव्र्को वाजसातौ|	further the holy thoughts of vamadeva be thou a guileless friend in fight for booty.
तवाम अनु परमतिम आ जगन्मोरुशंसो जरित्रे विश्वध सयाः|	we come to thee whose providence protects us wide be thy sway for ever for thy singer.
एभिर नर्भिर इन्द्र तवायुभिष टवा मघवद्भिर मघवन विश्व आजौ|	o indra with these men who love thee truly free givers maghavan in every battle.
दयावो न दयुम्नैर अभि सन्तो अर्यः कषपो मदेम शरदश च पूर्वीः|	may we rejoice through many autumns quelling our foes as days subdue the nights with splendour.
एवेद इन्द्राय वर्षभाय वर्ष्णे बरह्माकर्म भर्गवो न रथम|	now as the bhṛgus wrought a car for indra the strong the mighty we our prayer have fashioned.
नू चिद यथा नः सख्या वियोषद असन न उग्रो ऽविता तनूपाः|	that he may neer withdraw from us his friendship but be our bodies guard and strong defender.
नू षटुत इन्द्र नू गर्णान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो न पीपेः|	now indra lauded glorified with praises let power swell high like rivers for the singer.
अकारि ते हरिवो बरह्म नव्यं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	for thee a new hymn lord of bays is fashioned may we carborne through song be victors ever.
आशुं दधिक्रां तम उ नु षटवाम दिवस पर्थिव्या उत चर्किराम|	now give we praise to dadhikrās the rapid and mention in our laud the earth and heaven.
उछन्तीर माम उषसः सूदयन्त्व अति विश्वानि दुरितानि पर्षन|	may the dawns flushing move me to exertion and bear me safely over every trouble.
महश चर्कर्म्य अर्वतः करतुप्रा दधिक्राव्णः पुरुवारस्य वर्ष्णः|	i praise the mighty steed who fills my spirit the stallion dadhikrāvan rich in bounties.
यम पूरुभ्यो दीदिवांसं नाग्निं ददथुर मित्रावरुणा ततुरिम|	whom swift of foot and shining bright as agni ye varuṇa and mitra gave to pūrus.
यो अश्वस्य दधिक्राव्णो अकारीत समिद्धे अग्ना उषसो वयुष्टौ|	him who hath honoured when the flame is kindled at break of dawn the courser dadhikrāvan.
अनागसं तम अदितिः कर्णोतु स मित्रेण वरुणेना सजोषाः|	him of one mind with varuṇa and mitra may aditi make free from all transgression.
दधिक्राव्ण इष ऊर्जो महो यद अमन्महि मरुतां नाम भद्रम|	when we remember mighty dadhikrāvan our food and strength then the blest name of maruts.
सवस्तये वरुणम मित्रम अग्निं हवामह इन्द्रं वज्रबाहुम|	varuṇa mitra we invoke for welfare and agni and the thunderwielding indra.
इन्द्रम इवेद उभये वि हवयन्त उदीराणा यज्ञम उपप्रयन्तः|	both sides invoke him as they call on indra when they stir forth and turn to sacrificing.
दधिक्राम उ सूदनम मर्त्याय ददथुर मित्रावरुणा नो अश्वम|	to us have varuṇa and mitra granted the courser dadhikrās a guide for mortals.
दधिक्राव्णो अकारिषं जिष्णोर अश्वस्य वाजिनः|	so have i glorified with praise strong dadhikrāvan conquering steed.
सुरभि नो मुखा करत पर ण आयूंषि तारिषत|	sweet may he make our mouths may he prolong the days we have to live.
अयम इह परथमो धायि धात्र्भिर होता यजिष्ठो अध्वरेष्व ईड्यः|	here by ordainers was this god appointed first invoker best at worship to be praised at rites.
यम अप्नवानो भर्गवो विरुरुचुर वनेषु चित्रं विभ्वं विशेविशे|	whom apnavāna and the bhṛgus caused to shine brightcoloured in the wood spreading from home to home.
अग्ने कदा त आनुषग भुवद देवस्य चेतनम|	when shall thy glory as a god agni be suddenly shown forth.
अधा हि तवा जग्र्भ्रिरे मर्तासो विक्ष्व ईड्यम|	for mortal men have held thee fast adorable in all their homes.
रतावानं विचेतसम पश्यन्तो दयाम इव सत्र्भिः|	seeing thee faithful to the law most sapient like the starry heaven.
विश्वेषाम अध्वराणां हस्कर्तारं दमेदमे|	illumining with cheerful ray each solemn rite in every house.
आशुं दूतं विवस्वतो विश्वा यश चर्षणीर अभि|	vivasvāns envoy living men have taken as their ensign swift.
आ जभ्रुः केतुम आयवो भर्गवाणं विशेविशे|	the ruler over all mankind moving like bhṛgu in each home.
तम ईं होतारम आनुषक चिकित्वांसं नि षेदिरे|	him the intelligent have they placed duly as invoking priest.
रण्वम पावकशोचिषं यजिष्ठं सप्त धामभिः|	welcome with sanctifying flame best worshipper with sevenfold might.
तं शश्वतीषु मात्र्षु वन आ वीतम अश्रितम|	in his eternal mothers in the wood concealed and unapproached.
चित्रं सन्तं गुहा हितं सुवेदं कूचिदर्थिनम|	kept secret though his flames are bright seeking on all sides quickly found.
ससस्य यद वियुता सस्मिन्न ऊधन्न रतस्य धामन रणयन्त देवाः|	that as food spreads forth in this earthly udder gods may rejoice them in the home of order.
महां अग्निर नमसा रातहव्यो वेर अध्वराय सदम इद रतावा|	great agni served with reverence and oblation flies ever to the sacrifice the faithful.
वेर अध्वरस्य दूत्यानि विद्वान उभे अन्ता रोदसी संचिकित्वान|	bird of each rite skilled in an envoys duties knowing both worlds and that which lies between them.
दूत ईयसे परदिव उराणो विदुष्टरो दिव आरोधनानि|	thou goest from of old a willing herald knowing full well heavens innermost recesses.
कर्ष्णं त एम रुशतः पुरो भाश चरिष्ण्व अर्चिर वपुषाम इद एकम|	bright god thy path is black light is before thee thy moving splendour is the chief of wonders.
यद अप्रवीता दधते ह गर्भं सद्यश चिज जातो भवसीद उ दूतः|	when she yet unimpregnate hath conceived thee even when newly born thou art an envoy.
सद्यो जातस्य दद्र्शानम ओजो यद अस्य वातो अनुवाति शोचिः|	yet newly born his vigour is apparent when the wind blows upon his fiery splendour.
वर्णक्ति तिग्माम अतसेषु जिह्वां सथिरा चिद अन्ना दयते वि जम्भैः|	his sharpened tongue he layeth on the brushwood and with his teeth een solid food consumeth.
तर्षु यद अन्ना तर्षुणा ववक्ष तर्षुं दूतं कर्णुते यह्वो अग्निः|	when he hath borne off food with swift flame swiftly strong agni makes himself a speedy envoy.
वातस्य मेळिं सचते निजूर्वन्न आशुं न वाजयते हिन्वे अर्वा|	follows the rustling of the wind consuming and courserlike speeds drives the swift horse onward.
अनश्वो जातो अनभीशुर उक्थ्यो रथस तरिचक्रः परि वर्तते रजः|	the car that was not made for horses or for reins threewheeled worthy of lauds rolls round the firmament.
महत तद वो देव्यस्य परवाचनं दयाम रभवः पर्थिवीं यच च पुष्यथ|	that is the great announcement of your deity that o ye Ṛbhus ye sustain the earth and heaven.
रथं ये चक्रुः सुव्र्तं सुचेतसो ऽविह्वरन्तम मनसस परि धयया|	ye sapient ones who made the lightlyrolling car out of your mind by thought the car that never errs.
तां ऊ नव अस्य सवनस्य पीतय आ वो वाजा रभवो वेदयामसि|	you being such to drink of this drinkoffering you o ye vājas and ye Ṛbhus we invoke.
तद वो वाजा रभवः सुप्रवाचनं देवेषु विभ्वो अभवन महित्वनम|	o vājas Ṛbhus reaching far among the gods this was your exaltation gloriously declared.
जिव्री यत सन्ता पितरा सनाजुरा पुनर युवाना चरथाय तक्षथ|	in that your aged parents worn with length of days ye wrought again to youth so that they moved at will.
एकं वि चक्र चमसं चतुर्वयं निश चर्मणो गाम अरिणीत धीतिभिः|	the chalice that wag single ye have made fourfold and by your wisdom brought the cow forth from the hide.
अथा देवेष्व अम्र्तत्वम आनश शरुष्टी वाजा रभवस तद व उक्थ्यम|	so quickly mid the gods ye gained immortal life vājas and Ṛbhus your great work must be extolled.
रभुतो रयिः परथमश्रवस्तमो वाजश्रुतासो यम अजीजनन नरः|	wealth from the Ṛbhus is most glorious in renown that which the heroes famed for vigour have produced.
विभ्वतष्टो विदथेषु परवाच्यो यं देवासो ऽवथा स विचर्षणिः|	in synods must be sung the car which vibhvan wrought that which ye favour gods is famed among mankind.
स वाज्य अर्वा स रषिर वचस्यया स शूरो अस्ता पर्तनासु दुष्टरः|	strong is the steed the man a sage in eloquence the bowman is a hero hard to beat in fight.
स रायस पोषं स सुवीर्यं दधे यं वाजो विभ्वां रभवो यम आविषुः|	great store of wealth and manly power hath he obtained whom vāja vibhvan Ṛbhus have looked kindly on.
शरेष्ठं वः पेशो अधि धायि दर्शतं सतोमो वाजा रभवस तं जुजुष्टन|	to you hath been assigned the fairest ornament the hymn of praise vājas and Ṛbhus joy therein.
धीरासो हि षठा कवयो विपश्चितस तान व एना बरह्मणा वेदयामसि|	for ye have lore and wisdom and poetic skill as such with this our prayer we call on you to come.
यूयम अस्मभ्यं धिषणाभ्यस परि विद्वांसो विश्वा नर्याणि भोजना|	according to the wishes of our hearts may ye who have full knowledge of all the delights of men.
दयुमन्तं वाजं वर्षशुष्मम उत्तमम आ नो रयिम रभवस तक्षता वयः|	fashion for us o Ṛbhus power and splendid wealth rich in high courage excellent and vital strength.
इह परजाम इह रयिं रराणा इह शरवो वीरवत तक्षता नः|	bestowing on us here riches and offspring here fashion fame for us befitting heroes.
येन वयं चितयेमात्य अन्यान तं वाजं चित्रम रभवो ददा नः|	vouchsafe us wealth of splendid sort o Ṛbhus that we may make us more renowned than others.
ऊर्ध्व ऊ षु णो अध्वरस्य होतर अग्ने तिष्ठ देवताता यजीयान|	priest of our rite stand up erect o agni in the gods service best of sacrificers.
तवं हि विश्वम अभ्य असि मन्म पर वेधसश चित तिरसि मनीषाम|	for over evei y thought thou art the ruler thou furtherest een the wisdom of the pious.
अमूरो होता नय असादि विक्ष्व अग्निर मन्द्रो विदथेषु परचेताः|	he was set down mid men as priest unerring agni wise welcome in our holy synods.
ऊर्ध्वम भानुं सवितेवाश्रेन मेतेव धूमं सतभायद उप दयाम|	like savitar he hath lifted up his splendour and like a builder raised his smoke to heaven.
यता सुजूर्णी रातिनी घर्ताची परदक्षिणिद देवतातिम उराणः|	the glowing ladle filled with oil is lifted choosing gods service to the right he circles.
उद उ सवरुर नवजा नाक्रः पश्वो अनक्ति सुधितः सुमेकः|	eager he rises like the newwrought pillar which firmly set and fixed anoints the victims.
सतीर्णे बर्हिषि समिधाने अग्ना ऊर्ध्वो अध्वर्युर जुजुषाणो अस्थात|	when sacred grass is strewn and agni kindled the adhvaryu rises to his task rejoicing.
पर्य अग्निः पशुपा न होता तरिविष्ट्य एति परदिव उराणः|	agni the priest like one who tends the cattle goes three times round as from of old he wills it.
परि तमना मितद्रुर एति होताग्निर मन्द्रो मधुवचा रतावा|	agni himself the priest with measured motion goes round with sweet speech cheerful true to order.
दरवन्त्य अस्य वाजिनो न शोका भयन्ते विश्वा भुवना यद अभ्राट|	his fulgent flames run forth like vigorous horses all creatures are affrighted when he blazes.
भद्रा ते अग्ने सवनीक संद्र्ग घोरस्य सतो विषुणस्य चारुः|	beautiful and auspicious is thine aspect o lovely agni terrible when spreading.
न यत ते शोचिस तमसा वरन्त न धवस्मानस तन्व रेप आ धुः|	thy splendours are not covered by the darkness detraction leaves no stain upon thy body.
न यस्य सातुर जनितोर अवारि न मातरापितरा नू चिद इष्टौ|	naught hindered his production bounteous giver his mother and his sire were free to send him.
अधा मित्रो न सुधितः पावको ऽगनिर दीदाय मानुषीषु विक्षु|	then as friend benevolent refulgent agni shone forth in human habitations.
दविर यम पञ्च जीजनन संवसानाः सवसारो अग्निम मानुषीषु विक्षु|	he agni whom the twicefive sisters dwelling together in the homes of men engendered.
उषर्बुधम अथर्यो न दन्तं शुक्रं सवासम परशुं न तिग्मम|	bright like a spears tooth wakened in the morning with powerful mouth and like an axe wellsharpened.
तव तये अग्ने हरितो घर्तस्ना रोहितास रज्वञ्चः सवञ्चः|	these thy bay coursers agni dropping fatness ruddy vigorous speeding straightly forward.
अरुषासो वर्षण रजुमुष्का आ देवतातिम अह्वन्त दस्माः|	and red steeds wonderful of mighty muscle are to this service of the gods invited.
ये ह तये ते सहमाना अयासस तवेषासो अग्ने अर्चयश चरन्ति|	these brightlyshining games of thine o agni that move for ever restless allsubduing.
शयेनासो न दुवसनासो अर्थं तुविष्वणसो मारुतं न शर्धः|	like falcons hasting eagerly to the quarry roar loudly like the army of the maruts.
अकारि बरह्म समिधान तुभ्यं शंसात्य उक्थं यजते वय  धाः|	to thee o flaming god hath prayer been offered let the priest laud thee give to him who worships.
होतारम अग्निम मनुषो नि षेदुर नमस्यन्त उशिजः शंसम आयोः|	men have established agni as invoker fain to adore the glory of the living.
दूतं वो विश्ववेदसं हव्यवाहम अमर्त्यम|	your envoy who possesses all immortal bearer of your gifts.
यजिष्ठम रञ्जसे गिरा|	best worshipper i woo with song.
स हि वेदा वसुधितिम महां आरोधनं दिवः|	he mighty knows the gift of wealth he knows the deep recess of heaven.
स देवां एह वक्षति|	he shall bring hitherward the gods.
स वेद देव आनमं देवां रतायते दमे|	he knows a god himself to guide gods to the righteous in his home.
दाति परियाणि चिद वसु|	he gives een treasures that we love.
स होता सेद उ दूत्यं चिकित्वां अन्तर ईयते|	he is the herald wellinformed he doth his errand to and fro.
विद्वां आरोधनं दिवः|	knowing the deep recess of heaven.
ते सयाम ये अग्नये ददाशुर हव्यदातिभिः|	may we be they who gratify agni with sacrificial gifts.
य ईम पुष्यन्त इन्धते|	who cherish and enkindle him.
ते राया ते सुवीर्यैः ससवांसो वि शर्ण्विरे|	illustrious for wealth are they and hero deeds victorious.
ये अग्ना दधिरे दुवः|	who have served agni reverently.
अस्मे रायो दिवेदिवे सं चरन्तु पुरुस्प्र्हः|	so unto us day after day may riches craved by many come.
अस्मे वाजास ईरताम|	and power and might spring up for us.
स विप्रश चर्षणीनां शवसा मानुषाणाम|	that holy singer in his strength shoots forth his arrows swifter than.
अति कषिप्रेव विध्यति|	the swift shafts of the tribes of men.
तवा युजा तव तत सोम सख्य इन्द्रो अपो मनवे सस्रुतस कः|	allied with thee in this thy friendship soma indra for man made waters flow together.
अहन्न अहिम अरिणात सप्त सिन्धून अपाव्र्णोद अपिहितेव खानि|	slew ahi and sent forth the seven rivers and opened as it were obstructed fountains.
तवा युजा नि खिदत सूर्यस्येन्द्रश चक्रं सहसा सद्य इन्दो|	indu with thee for his confederate indra swiftly with might pressed down the wheel of sūrya.
अधि षणुना बर्हता वर्तमानम महो दरुहो अप विश्वायु धायि|	what rolled all lifes support on heavens high summit was separated from the great oppressor.
अहन्न इन्द्रो अदहद अग्निर इन्दो पुरा दस्यून मध्यंदिनाद अभीके|	indra smote down agni consumed o indu the dasyus ere the noontide in the conflict.
दुर्गे दुरोणे करत्वा न याताम पुरू सहस्रा शर्वा नि बर्हीत|	of those who gladly sought a hardwon dwelling he cast down many a thousand with his arrow.
विश्वस्मात सीम अधमां इन्द्र दस्यून विशो दासीर अक्र्णोर अप्रशस्ताः|	lower than all besides hast thou o indra cast down the dasyus abject tribes of dāsas.
अबाधेथाम अम्र्णतं नि शत्रून अविन्देथाम अपचितिं वधत्रैः|	ye drave away ye put to death the foemen and took great vengeance with your murdering weapons.
एवा सत्यम मघवाना युवं तद इन्द्रश च सोमोर्वम अश्व्यं गोः|	so of a truth indra and soma heroes ye burst the stable of the kine and horses.
आदर्द्र्तम अपिहितान्य अश्ना रिरिचथुः कषाश चित तत्र्दाना|	the stable which the bar or stone obstructed and piercing through set free the habitations.
उतो हि वां दात्रा सन्ति पूर्वा या पूरुभ्यस तरसदस्युर नितोशे|	from you two came the gifts in days aforetime which trasadasyu granted to the pūrus.
कषेत्रासां ददथुर उर्वरासां घनं दस्युभ्यो अभिभूतिम उग्रम|	ye gave the winner of our fields and ploughlands and the strong smiter who subdued the dasyus.
उत वाजिनम पुरुनिष्षिध्वानं दधिक्राम उ ददथुर विश्वक्र्ष्टिम|	and ye gave mighty dadhikrās the giver of many gifts who visiteth all people.
रजिप्यं शयेनम परुषितप्सुम आशुं चर्क्र्त्यम अर्यो नर्पतिं न शूरम|	impetuous hawk swift and of varied colour like a brave king whom each true man must honour.
यं सीम अनु परवतेव दरवन्तं विश्वः पूरुर मदति हर्षमाणः|	whom as twere down a precipice swift rushing each pūru praises and his heart rejoices.
पड्भिर गर्ध्यन्तम मेधयुं न शूरं रथतुरं वातम इव धरजन्तम|	springing forth like a hero fain for battle whirling the car and flying like the tempest.
यः समारुन्धानो गध्या समत्सु सनुतरश चरति गोषु गछन|	who gaineth precious booty in the combats and moveth winning spoil among the cattle.
आविर्र्जीको विदथा निचिक्यत तिरो अरतिम पर्य आप आयोः|	shown in bright colour looking on the assemblies beyond the churl to worship of the living.
उत समैनं वस्त्रमथिं न तायुम अनु करोशन्ति कषितयो भरेषु|	loudly the folk cry after him in battles as twere a thief who steals away a garment.
नीचायमानं जसुरिं न शयेनं शरवश चाछा पशुमच च यूथम|	speeding to glory or a herd of cattle even as a hungry falcon swooping downward.
उत समासु परथमः सरिष्यन नि वेवेति शरेणिभी रथानाम|	and fain to come forth first amid these armies this way and that with rows of cars he rushes.
सरजं कर्ण्वानो जन्यो न शुभ्वा रेणुं रेरिहत किरणं ददश्वान|	gay like a bridesman making him a garland tossing the dust champing the rein that holds him.
उत सय वाजी सहुरिर रतावा शुश्रूषमाणस तन्वा समर्ये|	and that strong steed victorious and faithful obedient with his body in the combat.
तुरं यतीषु तुरयन्न रजिप्यो ऽधि भरुवोः किरते रेणुम रञ्जन|	speeding straight on amid the swiftly pressing casts oer his brows the dust he tosses upward.
उत समास्य तन्यतोर इव दयोर रघायतो अभियुजो भयन्ते|	and at his thunder like the roar of heaven those who attack tremble and are affrighted.
यदा सहस्रम अभि षीम अयोधीद दुर्वर्तुः समा भवति भीम रञ्जन|	for when he fights against embattled thousands dread is he in his striving none may stay him.
उत समास्य पनयन्ति जना जूतिं कर्ष्टिप्रो अभिभूतिम आशोः|	the people praise the overpowering swiftness of this fleet steed who giveth men abundance.
उतैनम आहुः समिथे वियन्तः परा दधिक्रा असरत सहस्रैः|	of him they say when drawing back from battle dadhikrās hath sped forward with his thousands.
आ दधिक्राः शवसा पञ्च कर्ष्टीः सूर्य इव जयोतिषापस ततान|	dadhikrās hath oerspread the fivefold people with vigour as the sun lightens the waters.
सहस्रसाः शतसा वाज्य अर्वा पर्णक्तु मध्वा सम इमा वचांसि|	may the strong steed who winneth hundreds thousands requite with sweetness these my words and praises.
अग्निर होता नो अध्वरे वाजी सन परि णीयते|	agni the herald like a horse is led forth at our solemn rite.
देवो देवेषु यज्ञियः|	god among gods adorable.
परि तरिविष्ट्य अध्वरं यात्य अग्नी रथीर इव|	three times unto our solemn rite comes agni like a charioteer.
आ देवेषु परयो दधत|	bearing the viands to the gods.
परि वाजपतिः कविर अग्निर हव्यान्य अक्रमीत|	round the oblations hath he paced agni the wise the lord of strength.
दधद रत्नानि दाशुषे|	giving the offerer precious boons.
अयं यः सर्ञ्जये पुरो दैववाते समिध्यते|	he who is kindled eastward for sṛñjaya devāvatas son.
दयुमां अमित्रदम्भनः|	resplendent tamer of the foe.
अस्य घा वीर ईवतो ऽगनेर ईशीत मर्त्यः|	so mighty be the agni whom the mortal hero shall command.
तिग्मजम्भस्य मीळ्हुषः|	with sharpened teeth and bountiful.
तम अर्वन्तं न सानसिम अरुषं न दिवः शिशुम|	day after day they dress him as they clean a horse who wins the prize.
मर्म्र्ज्यन्ते दिवेदिवे|	dress the red scion of the sky.
बोधद यन मा हरिभ्यां कुमारः साहदेव्यः|	when sahadevas princely son with two bay horses thought of me.
अछा न हूत उद अरम|	summoned by him i drew not back.
उत तया यजता हरी कुमारात साहदेव्यात|	and truly those two noble bays i straightway took when offered me.
परयता सद्य आ ददे|	from sahadevas princely son.
एष वां देवाव अश्विना कुमारः साहदेव्यः|	long o ye aśvins may he live your care ye gods the princely son.
दीर्घायुर अस्तु सोमकः|	of sahadeva somaka.
तं युवं देवाव अश्विना कुमारं साहदेव्यम|	cause him the youthful prince the son of sahadeva to enjoy.
दीर्घायुषं कर्णोतन|	long life o aśvins o ye gods.
अयम पन्था अनुवित्तः पुराणो यतो देवा उदजायन्त विश्वे|	this is the ancient and accepted pathway by which all gods have come into existence.
अतश चिद आ जनिषीष्ट परव्र्द्धो मा मातरम अमुया पत्तवे कः|	hereby could one be born though waxen mighty let him not otherwise destroy his mother.
नाहम अतो निर अया दुर्गहैतत तिरश्चता पार्श्वान निर गमाणि|	not this way go i forth hard is the passage forth from the side obliquely will i issue.
बहूनि मे अक्र्ता कर्त्वानि युध्यै तवेन सं तवेन पर्छै|	much that is yet undone must i accomplish one must i combat and the other question.
परायतीम मातरम अन्व अचष्ट न नानु गान्य अनु नू गमानि|	he bent his eye upon the dying mother my word i now withdraw that way i follow.
तवष्टुर गर्हे अपिबत सोमम इन्द्रः शतधन्यं चम्वोः सुतस्य|	in tvaṣṭars dwelling india drank the soma a hundredworth of juice pressed from the mortar.
किं स रधक कर्णवद यं सहस्रम मासो जभार शरदश च पूर्वीः|	what strange act shall he do he whom his mother bore for a thousand months and many autumns.
नही नव अस्य परतिमानम अस्त्य अन्तर जातेषूत ये जनित्वाः|	no peer hath he among those born already nor among those who shall be born hereafter.
अवद्यम इव मन्यमाना गुहाकर इन्द्रम माता वीर्येणा नयॄष्टम|	deeming him a reproach his mother hid him indra endowed with all heroic valour.
अथोद अस्थात सवयम अत्कं वसान आ रोदसी अप्र्णाज जायमानः|	then up he sprang himself assumed his vesture and filled as soon as born the earth and heaven.
एता अर्षन्त्य अललाभवन्तीर रतावरीर इव संक्रोशमानाः|	with lively motion onward flow these waters the holy ones shouting as twere together.
एता वि पर्छ किम इदम भनन्ति कम आपो अद्रिम परिधिं रुजन्ति|	ask them to tell thee what the floods are saying what girdling rock the waters burst asunder.
किम उ षविद अस्मै निविदो भनन्तेन्द्रस्यावद्यं दिधिषन्त आपः|	are they addressing him with words of welcome will the floods take on them the shame of indra.
ममैतान पुत्रो महता वधेन वर्त्रं जघन्वां अस्र्जद वि सिन्धून|	with his great thunderbolt my son hath slaughtered vṛtra and set these rivers free to wander.
ममच चन तवा युवतिः परास ममच चन तवा कुषवा जगार|	i cast thee from me minethy youthful mother thee mine own offspring kusava hath swallowed.
ममच चिद आपः शिशवे मम्र्ड्युर ममच चिद इन्द्रः सहसोद अतिष्ठत|	to him mine infant were the waters gracious indra my son rose up in conquering vigour.
ममच चन ते मघवन वयंसो निविविध्वां अप हनू जघान|	thou art mine own o maghavan whom vyaṁsa struck to the ground and smote thy jaws in pieces.
अधा निविद्ध उत्तरो बभूवाञ छिरो दासस्य सम पिणक वधेन|	but smitten through the mastery thou wonnest and with thy bolt the dāsas head thou crushedst.
गर्ष्टिः ससूव सथविरं तवागाम अनाध्र्ष्यं वर्षभं तुम्रम इन्द्रम|	the heifer hath brought forth the strong the mighty the unconquerable bull the furious indra.
अरीळ्हं वत्सं चरथाय माता सवयं गातुं तन्व इछमानम|	the mother left her unlicked calf to wander seeking himself the path that he would follow.
उत माता महिषम अन्व अवेनद अमी तवा जहति पुत्र देवाः|	then to her mighty child the mother turned her saying my son these deities forsake thee.
अथाब्रवीद वर्त्रम इन्द्रो हनिष्यन सखे विष्णो वितरं वि करमस्व|	then indra said about to slaughter vṛtra o my friend vṛtra stride full boldly forward.
कस ते मातरं विधवाम अचक्रच छयुं कस तवाम अजिघांसच चरन्तम|	who was he then who made thy mother widow who sought to stay thee lying still or moving.
कस ते देवो अधि मार्डीक आसीद यत पराक्षिणाः पितरम पादग्र्ह्य|	what god when by the foot thy sire thou tookest and slewest was at hand to give thee comfort.
अवर्त्या शुन आन्त्राणि पेचे न देवेषु विविदे मर्डितारम|	in deep distress i cooked a dogs intestines among the gods i found not one to comfort.
अपश्यं जायाम अमहीयमानाम अधा मे शयेनो मध्व आ जभार|	my consort i beheld in degradation the falcon then brought me the pleasant soma.
इदम उ तयत पुरुतमम पुरस्ताज जयोतिस तमसो वयुनावद अस्थात|	forth from the darkness in the region eastward this most abundant splendid light hatb mounted.
नूनं दिवो दुहितरो विभातीर गातुं कर्णवन्न उषसो जनाय|	now verily the farrefulgent mornings daughters of heaven bring welfare to the people.
अस्थुर उ चित्रा उषसः पुरस्तान मिता इव सवरवो ऽधवरेषु|	the richlycoloured dawns have mounted eastward like pillars planted at our sacrifices.
वय ऊ वरजस्य तमसो दवारोछन्तीर अव्रञ छुचयः पावकाः|	and flushing far splendid and purifying unbarred the portals of the fold of darkness.
उछन्तीर अद्य चितयन्त भोजान राधोदेयायोषसो मघोनीः|	dispelling gloom this day the wealthy mornings urge liberal givers to present their treasures.
अचित्रे अन्तः पणयः ससन्त्व अबुध्यमानास तमसो विमध्ये|	in the unlightened depth of darkness round them let niggard traffickers sleep unawakened.
कुवित स देवीः सनयो नवो वा यामो बभूयाद उषसो वो अद्य|	o goddesses is this your car i ask you ancient this day or is it new ye mornings.
येना नवग्वे अङगिरे दशग्वे सप्तास्ये रेवती रेवद ऊष|	wherewith rich dawns ye seek with wealth navagva daśagva aṅgira the seventoned singer.
यूयं हि देवीर रतयुग्भिर अश्वैः परिप्रयाथ भुवनानि सद्यः|	with horses harnessed by eternal order goddesses swiftly round the worlds ye travel.
परबोधयन्तीर उषसः ससन्तं दविपाच चतुष्पाच चरथाय जीवम|	arousing from their rest o dawns the sleeping and all that lives man bird and beast to motion.
कव सविद आसां कतमा पुराणी यया विधाना विदधुर रभूणाम|	which among these is eldest and where is she through whom they fixed the Ṛbhus regulations.
शुभं यच छुभ्रा उषसश चरन्ति न वि जञायन्ते सद्र्शीर अजुर्याः|	what time the splendid dawns go forth for splendour they are not known apart alike unwasting.
ता घा ता भद्रा उषसः पुरासुर अभिष्टिद्युम्ना रतजातसत्याः|	blest were these dawns of old shining with succour true with the truth that springs from holy order.
यास्व ईजानः शशमान उक्थै सतुवञ छंसन दरविणं सद्य आप|	with whom the toiling worshipper by praises hymning and lauding soon attained to riches.
ता आ चरन्ति समना पुरस्तात समानतः समना पप्रथानाः|	hither from eastward all at once they travel from one place spreading in the selfsame manner.
रतस्य देवीः सदसो बुधाना गवां न सर्गा उषसो जरन्ते|	awaking from the seat of holy order the godlike dawns come nigh like troops of cattle.
ता इन नव एव समना समानीर अमीतवर्णा उषसश चरन्ति|	thus they go forth with undiminished colours these mornings similar in selfsame fashion.
गूहन्तीर अभ्वम असितं रुशद्भिः शुक्रास तनूभिः शुचयो रुचानाः|	concealing the gigantic might of darkness with radiant bodies bright and pure and shining.
रयिं दिवो दुहितरो विभातीः परजावन्तं यछतास्मासु देवीः|	o goddesses o heavens refulgent daughters bestow upon us wealth with store of children.
सयोनाद आ वः परतिबुध्यमानाः सुवीर्यस्य पतयः सयाम|	as from our pleasant place of rest ye rouse us may we be masters of heroic vigour.
तद वो दिवो दुहितरो विभातीर उप बरुव उषसो यज्ञकेतुः|	wellskilled in lore of sacrifice ye daughters of heaven refulgent dawns i thus address you.
वयं सयाम यशसो जनेषु तद दयौश च धत्ताम पर्थिवी च देवी|	may we be glorious among the people may heaven vouchsafe us this and earth the goddess.
का सुष्टुतिः शवसः सूनुम इन्द्रम अर्वाचीनं राधस आ ववर्तत|	what worthy praise will bring before us indra the son of strength that he may grant us riches.
ददिर हि वीरो गर्णते वसूनि स गोपतिर निष्षिधां नो जनासः|	for he the hero gives the singer treasures he is the lord who sends us gifts ye people.
स वर्त्रहत्ये हव्यः स ईड्यः स सुष्टुत इन्द्रः सत्यराधाः|	to be invoked and hymned in fight with vṛtra that wellpraised indra gives us real bounties.
स यामन्न आ मघवा मर्त्याय बरह्मण्यते सुष्वये वरिवो धात|	that maghavan brings comfort in the foray to the religious man who pours libations.
तम इन नरो वि हवयन्ते समीके रिरिक्वांसस तन्वः कर्ण्वत तराम|	him verily the men invoke in combat risking their lives they make him their protector.
मिथो यत तयागम उभयासो अग्मन नरस तोकस्य तनयस्य सातौ|	when heroes foe to foe give up their bodies fighting each side for children and their offspring.
करतूयन्ति कषितयो योग उग्राशुषाणासो मिथो अर्णसातौ|	strong god the folk at need put forth their vigour striving together in the whirl of battle.
सं यद विशो ऽवव्र्त्रन्त युध्मा आद इन नेम इन्द्रयन्ते अभीके|	when warrior bands encounter one another some in the grapple quit themselves like indra.
आद इद ध नेम इन्द्रियं यजन्त आद इत पक्तिः पुरोळाशं रिरिच्यात|	hence many a one worships the might of indra hence let the brew succeed the mealoblation.
आद इत सोमो वि पप्र्च्याद असुष्वीन आद इज जुजोष वर्षभं यजध्यै|	hence let the soma banish those who pour not even hence i joy to pay the strong one worship.
कर्णोत्य अस्मै वरिवो य इत्थेन्द्राय सोमम उशते सुनोति|	indra gives comfort to the man who truly presses for him who longs for it the soma.
सध्रीचीनेन मनसाविवेनन तम इत सखायं कर्णुते समत्सु|	not disaffected with devoted spirit this man he takes to be his friend in battles.
य इन्द्राय सुनवत सोमम अद्य पचात पक्तीर उत भर्ज्जाति धानाः|	he who this day for indra presses soma prepares the brew and fries the grains of barley.
परति मनायोर उचथानि हर्यन तस्मिन दधद वर्षणं शुष्मम इन्द्रः|	loving the hymns of that devoted servant to him may indra give heroic vigour.
यदा समर्यं वय अचेद रघावा दीर्घं यद आजिम अभ्य अख्यद अर्यः|	when the impetuous chief hath sought the conflict and the lord looked upon the longdrawn battle.
अचिक्रदद वर्षणम पत्न्य अछा दुरोण आ निशितं सोमसुद्भिः|	the matron calls to the strong god whom pressers of soma have encouraged in the dwelling.
भूयसा वस्नम अचरत कनीयो ऽविक्रीतो अकानिषम पुनर यन|	he bid a small price for a thing of value i was content returning still unpurchased.
स भूयसा कनीयो नारिरेचीद दीना दक्षा वि दुहन्ति पर वाणम|	he heightened not his insufficient offer simple and clever both milk out the udder.
क इमं दशभिर ममेन्द्रं करीणाति धेनुभिः|	who for ten milchkine purchaseth from me this indra who is mine.
यदा वर्त्राणि जङघनद अथैनम मे पुनर ददत|	when he hath slain the vṛtras let the buyer give him back to me.
नू षटुत इन्द्र नू गर्णान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो न पीपेः|	now indra lauded glorified with praises let wealth swell high like rivers for the singer.
अकारि ते हरिवो बरह्म नव्यं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	for thee a new hymn lord of bays is fashioned may we carborne through song be victors ever.
अग्ने तम अद्याश्वं न सतोमैः करतुं न भद्रं हर्दिस्प्र्शम|	this day with praises agni we bring thee that which thou lovest.
रध्यामा त ओहैः|	right judgment like a horse with our devotions.
अधा हय अग्ने करतोर भद्रस्य दक्षस्य साधोः|	for thou hast ever been the cardriver agni of noble.
रथीर रतस्य बर्हतो बभूथ|	strength lofty sacrifice and rightful judgment.
एभिर नो अर्कैर भवा नो अर्वाङ सवर ण जयोतिः|	through these our praises come thou to meet us bright as the sunlight.
अग्ने विश्वेभिः सुमना अनीकैः|	o agni well disposed with all thine aspects.
आभिष टे अद्य गीर्भिर गर्णन्तो ऽगने दाशेम|	now may we serve thee singing these lauds this day to thee agni.
पर ते दिवो न सतनयन्ति शुष्माः|	loud as the voice of heaven thy blasts are roaring.
तव सवादिष्ठाग्ने संद्र्ष्टिर इदा चिद अह्न इदा चिद अक्तोः|	just at this time of the day and the night thy look is the sweetest.
शरिये रुक्मो न रोचत उपाके|	it shineth near us even as gold for glory.
घर्तं न पूतं तनूर अरेपाः शुचि हिरण्यम|	spotless thy body brilliant as gold like clarified butter.
तत ते रुक्मो न रोचत सवधावः|	this gleams like gold on thee o self dependent.
कर्तं चिद धि षमा सनेमि दवेषो ऽगन इनोषि मर्तात|	all hate and mischief yea if committed agni thou turnest.
इत्था यजमानाद रतावः|	holy one from the man who rightly worships.
शिवा नः सख्या सन्तु भरात्राग्ने देवेषु युष्मे|	agni with you gods prosperous be our friendships and kinships.
सा नो नाभिः सदने सस्मिन्न ऊधन|	be this our bond here by this place thine altar.
कषेत्रस्य पतिना वयं हितेनेव जयामसि|	we through the master of the field even as through a friend obtain.
गाम अश्वम पोषयित्न्व आ स नो मर्ळातीद्र्शे|	what nourisheth our kine and steeds in such may he be good to us.
कषेत्रस्य पते मधुमन्तम ऊर्मिं धेनुर इव पयो अस्मासु धुक्ष्व|	as the cow yieldeth milk pour for us freely lord of the field the wave that beareth sweetness.
मधुश्चुतं घर्तम इव सुपूतम रतस्य नः पतयो मर्ळयन्तु|	distilling meath wellpurified like butter and let the lords of holy law be gracious.
मधुमतीर ओषधीर दयाव आपो मधुमन नो भवत्व अन्तरिक्षम|	sweet be the plants for us the heavens the waters and full of sweets for us be airs midregion.
कषेत्रस्य पतिर मधुमान नो अस्त्व अरिष्यन्तो अन्व एनं चरेम|	may the fields lord for us be full of sweetness and may we follow after him uninjured.
शुनं वाहाः शुनं नरः शुनं कर्षतु लाङगलम|	happily work our steers and men may the plough furrow happily.
शुनं वरत्रा बध्यन्तां शुनम अष्ट्राम उद इङगय|	happily be the traces bound happily may he ply the goad.
शुनासीराव इमां वाचं जुषेथां यद दिवि चक्रथुः पयः|	Śuna and sīra welcome ye this laud and with the milk which ye have made in heaven.
तेनेमाम उप सिञ्चतम|	bedew ye both this earth of ours.
अर्वाची सुभगे भव सीते वन्दामहे तवा|	auspicious sītā come thou near we venerate and worship thee.
यथा नः सुभगाससि यथा नः सुफलाससि|	that thou mayst bless and prosper us and bring us fruits abundantly.
इन्द्रः सीतां नि गर्ह्णातु ताम पूषानु यछतु|	may indra press the furrow down may pūṣan guide its course aright.
सा नः पयस्वती दुहाम उत्तरामउत्तरां समाम|	may she as rich in milk be drained for us through each succeeding year.
शुनं नः फाला वि कर्षन्तु भूमिं शुनं कीनाशा अभि यन्तु वाहैः|	happily let the shares turn up the ploughland happily go the ploughers with the oxen.
शुनम पर्जन्यो मधुना पयोभिः शुनासीरा शुनम अस्मासु धत्तम|	with meath and milk parjanya make us happy grant us prosperity Śuna and sīra.
इन्द्रा को वां वरुणा सुम्नम आप सतोमो हविष्मां अम्र्तो न होता|	what laud o indravaruṇa with oblation hath like the immortal priest obtained your favour.
यो वां हर्दि करतुमां अस्मद उक्तः पस्पर्शद इन्द्रावरुणा नमस्वान|	hath our effectual laud addressed with homage touched you o indravaruṇa in spirit.
इन्द्रा ह यो वरुणा चक्र आपी देवौ मर्तः सख्याय परयस्वान|	he who with dainty food hath won you indra and varuṇa gods as his allies to friendship.
स हन्ति वर्त्रा समिथेषु शत्रून अवोभिर वा महद्भिः स पर शर्ण्वे|	slayeth the vṛtras and his foes in battles and through your mighty favours is made famous.
इन्द्रा ह रत्नं वरुणा धेष्ठेत्था नर्भ्यः शशमानेभ्यस ता|	indra and varuṇa are most liberal givers of treasure to the men who toil to serve them.
यदी सखाया सख्याय सोमैः सुतेभिः सुप्रयसा मादयैते|	when they as friends inclined to friendship honoured with dainty food delight in flowing soma.
इन्द्रा युवं वरुणा दिद्युम अस्मिन्न ओजिष्ठम उग्रा नि वधिष्टं वज्रम|	indra and varuṇa ye hurl o mighty on him your strongest flashing bolt of thunder.
यो नो दुरेवो वर्कतिर दभीतिस तस्मिन मिमाथाम अभिभूत्य ओजः|	who treats us ill the robber and oppressor measure on him your overwhelming vigour.
इन्द्रा युवं वरुणा भूतम अस्या धियः परेतारा वर्षभेव धेनोः|	o indravaruṇa be ye the lovers of this my song as steers who love the milchcow.
सा नो दुहीयद यवसेव गत्वी सहस्रधारा पयसा मही गौः|	milk may it yield us as gone forth to pasture the great cow pouring out her thousand rivers.
तोके हिते तनय उर्वरासु सूरो दर्शीके वर्षणश च पौंस्ये|	for fertile fields for worthy sons and grandsons for the suns beauty and for steerlike vigour.
इन्द्रा नो अत्र वरुणा सयाताम अवोभिर दस्मा परितक्म्यायाम|	may indravaruṇa with gracious favours work marvels for us in the stress of battle.
युवाम इद धय अवसे पूर्व्याय परि परभूती गविषः सवापी|	for you as princes for your ancient kindness good comrades of the man who seeks for booty.
वर्णीमहे सख्याय परियाय शूरा मंहिष्ठा पितरेव शम्भू|	we choose to us for the dear bond of friendship most liberal heroes bringing bliss like parents.
ता वां धियो ऽवसे वाजयन्तीर आजिं न जग्मुर युवयूः सुदानू|	showing their strength these hymns for grace freegivers i have gone to you devoted as to battle.
शरिये न गाव उप सोमम अस्थुर इन्द्रं गिरो वरुणम मे मनीषाः|	for glory have they gone as milk to soma to indravaruṇa my thoughts and praises.
इमा इन्द्रं वरुणम मे मनीषा अग्मन्न उप दरविणम इछमानाः|	to indra and to varuṇa desirous of gaining wealth have these my thoughts proceeded.
उपेम अस्थुर जोष्टार इव वस्वो रघ्वीर इव शरवसो भिक्षमाणाः|	they have come nigh to you as treasurelovers like mares fleetfooted eager for the glory.
अश्व्यस्य तमना रथ्यस्य पुष्टेर नित्यस्य रायः पतयः सयाम|	may we ourselves be lords of during riches of ample sustenance for car and hones.
ता चक्राणा ऊतिभिर नव्यसीभिर अस्मत्रा रायो नियुतः सचन्ताम|	so may the twain who work with newest succours bring yoked teams hitherward to us and riches.
आ नो बर्हन्ता बर्हतीभिर ऊती इन्द्र यातं वरुण वाजसातौ|	come with your mighty succours o ye mighty come indravaruṇa to us in battle.
यद दिद्यवः पर्तनासु परक्रीळान तस्य वां सयाम सनितार आजेः|	what time the flashing arrows play in combat may we through you be winners in the contest.
एवा तवाम इन्द्र वज्रिन्न अत्र विश्वे देवासः सुहवास ऊमाः|	thee verily o thunderwielding indra all the gods here the helpers swift to listen.
महाम उभे रोदसी वर्द्धम रष्वं निर एकम इद वर्णते वर्त्रहत्ये|	and both the worlds elected thee the mighty high waxen strong alone to slaughter vṛtra.
अवास्र्जन्त जिव्रयो न देवा भुवः सम्राळ इन्द्र सत्ययोनिः|	the gods as worn witheld relaxed their efforts thou indra born of truth wast sovran ruler.
अहन्न अहिम परिशयानम अर्णः पर वर्तनीर अरदो विश्वधेनाः|	thou slewest ahi who besieged the waters and duggest out their allsupporting channels.
अत्र्प्णुवन्तं वियतम अबुध्यम अबुध्यमानं सुषुपाणम इन्द्र|	the insatiate one extended hard to waken who slumbered in perpetual sleep o indra.
सप्त परति परवत आशयानम अहिं वज्रेण वि रिणा अपर्वन|	the dragon stretched against the seven prone rivers where no joint was thou rentest with thy thunder.
अक्षोदयच छवसा कषाम बुध्नं वार ण वातस तविषीभिर इन्द्रः|	indra with might shook earth and her foundation as the wind stirs the water with its fury.
दर्ळ्हान्य औभ्नाद उशमान ओजो ऽवाभिनत ककुभः पर्वतानाम|	striving with strength he burst the firm asunder and tore away the summits of the mountains.
अभि पर दद्रुर जनयो न गर्भं रथा इव पर ययुः साकम अद्रयः|	they ran to thee as mothers to their offspring the clouds like chariots hastened forth together.
अतर्पयो विस्र्त उब्ज ऊर्मीन तवं वर्तां अरिणा इन्द्र सिन्धून|	thou didst refresh the streams and force the billows thou indra settest free obstructed rivers.
तवम महीम अवनिं विश्वधेनां तुर्वीतये वय्याय कषरन्तीम|	thou for the sake of vayya and turvīti didst stay the great stream flowing allsustaining.
अरमयो नमसैजद अर्णः सुतरणां अक्र्णोर इन्द्र सिन्धून|	yea at their prayer didst check the rushing river and make the floods easy to cross o indra.
पराग्रुवो नभन्वो न वक्वा धवस्रा अपिन्वद युवतीर रतज्ञाः|	he let the young maids skilled in law unwedded like fountains bubbling flow forth streaming onward.
धन्वान्य अज्रां अप्र्णक तर्षाणां अधोग इन्द्र सतर्यो दंसुपत्नीः|	he inundated thirsty plains and deserts and milked the dry cows of the mighty master.
पूर्वीर उषसः शरदश च गूर्ता वर्त्रं जघन्वां अस्र्जद वि सिन्धून|	through many a morn and many a lovely autumn having slain vṛtra he set free the rivers.
परिष्ठिता अत्र्णद बद्बधानाः सीरा इन्द्रः सरवितवे पर्थिव्या|	indra hath set at liberty to wander on earth the streams encompassed pressed together.
वम्रीभिः पुत्रम अग्रुवो अदानं निवेशनाद धरिव आ जभर्थ|	lord of bay steeds thou broughtest from the anthill the unwedded damsels son whom ants were eating.
वय अन्धो अख्यद अहिम आददानो निर भूद उखछित सम अरन्त पर्व|	the blind saw clearly as he grasped the serpent rose brake the jar his joints again united.
पर ते पूर्वाणि करणानि विप्राविद्वां आह विदुषे करांसि|	to the wise man o sage and sovran ruler the man who knoweth all thine ancient exploits.
यथायथा वर्ष्ण्यानि सवगूर्तापांसि राजन नर्याविवेषीः|	hath told these deeds of might as thou hast wrought them great acts spontaneous and to mans advantage.
नू षटुत इन्द्र नू गर्णान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो न पीपेः|	now indra lauded glorified with praises let powers swell high like rivers for the singer.
अकारि ते हरिवो बरह्म नव्यं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	for thee a new hymn lord of bays is fashioned may we carborne through song be victors ever.
आ तू न इन्द्र वर्त्रहन्न अस्माकम अर्धम आ गहि|	o thou who slewest vṛtra come o indra hither to our side.
महान महीभिर ऊतिभिः|	mighty one with thy mighty aids.
भर्मिश चिद घासि तूतुजिर आ चित्र चित्रिणीष्व आ|	swift and impetuous art thou wondrous amid the welldressed folk.
चित्रं कर्णोष्य ऊतये|	thou doest marvels for our help.
दभ्रेभिश चिच छशीयांसं हंसि वराधन्तम ओजसा|	even with the weak thou smitest down him.
सखिभिर ये तवे सचा|	who is stronger with thy strength.
वयम इन्द्र तवे सचा वयं तवाभि नोनुमः|	the mighty with the friends thou hast.
अस्मांअस्मां इद उद अव|	o indra we are close to thee to thee we sing aloud our songs.
स नश चित्राभिर अद्रिवो ऽनवद्याभिर ऊतिभिः|	help and defend us even us.
अनाध्र्ष्टाभिर आ गहि|	as such o caster of the stone come with thy succours wonderful.
भूयामो षु तवावतः सखाय इन्द्र गोमतः|	blameless and irresistible.
युजो वाजाय घर्ष्वये|	may we be friends of one like thee o indra with the wealth of kine.
तवं हय एक ईशिष इन्द्र वाजस्य गोमतः|	comrades for lively energy.
स नो यन्धि महीम इषम|	for thou o indra art alone the lord of strength that comes from kine.
न तवा वरन्ते अन्यथा यद दित्ससि सतुतो मघम|	so grant thou us abundant food.
सतोत्र्भ्य इन्द्र गिर्वणः|	they turn thee not another way when lauded lover of the song.
अभि तवा गोतमा गिरानूषत पर दावने|	thou wilt give wealth to those who praise.
इन्द्र वाजाय घर्ष्वये|	the gotamas have sung their song of praise to thee that thou mayst give.
पर ते वोचाम वीर्या या मन्दसान आरुजः|	indra for lively energy.
पुरो दासीर अभीत्य|	we will declare thy hero deeds what dāsa forts thou brakest down.
ता ते गर्णन्ति वेधसो यानि चकर्थ पौंस्या|	attacking them in rapturous joy.
सुतेष्व इन्द्र गिर्वणः|	the sages sing those manly deeds which indra lover of the song.
अवीव्र्धन्त गोतमा इन्द्र तवे सतोमवाहसः|	thou wroughtest when the soma flowed.
ऐषु धा वीरवद यशः|	indra the gotamas who bring thee praises have grown strong by thee.
यच चिद धि शश्वताम असीन्द्र साधारणस तवम|	give them renown with hero sons.
तं तवा वयं हवामहे|	for indra verily thou art the general treasure even of all.
अर्वाचीनो वसो भवास्मे सु मत्स्वान्धसः|	thee therefore do we invocate.
सोमानाम इन्द्र सोमपाः|	excellent indra turn to us glad thee among us with the juice.
अस्माकं तवा मतीनाम आ सतोम इन्द्र यछतु|	of somas somadrinker thou.
अर्वाग आ वर्तया हरी|	may praise from us who think qn thee o indra bring thee near to us.
पुरोळाशं च नो घसो जोषयासे गिरश च नः|	turn thy two bay steeds hitherward.
वधूयुर इव योषणाम|	eat of our sacrificial cake rejoice thee in the songs we sing.
सहस्रं वयतीनां युक्तानाम इन्द्रम ईमहे|	even as a lover in his bride.
शतं सोमस्य खार्यः|	to india for a thousand steeds welltrained and fleet of foot we pray.
सहस्रा ते शता वयं गवाम आ चयावयामसि|	and hundred jars of soma juice.
अस्मत्रा राध एतु ते|	we make a hundred of thy kine yea and a thousand hasten nigh.
दश ते कलशानां हिरण्यानाम अधीमहि|	so let thy bounty come to us.
भूरिदा असि वर्त्रहन|	we have obtained a gift from thee ten waterewers wrought of gold.
भूरिदा भूरि देहि नो मा दभ्रम भूर्य आ भर|	thou vṛtraslayer givest much.
भूरि घेद इन्द्र दित्ससि|	a bounteous giver give us much bring much and not a trifling gift.
भूरिदा हय असि शरुतः पुरुत्रा शूर वर्त्रहन|	much indra wilt thou fain bestow.
आ नो भजस्व राधसि|	o vṛtraslayer thou art famed in many a place as bountiful.
पर ते बभ्रू विचक्षण शंसामि गोषणो नपात|	hero thy bounty let us share.
माभ्यां गा अनु शिश्रथः|	i praise thy pair of tawny steeds wise son of him who giveth kine.
कनीनकेव विद्रधे नवे दरुपदे अर्भके|	terrify not the cows with these.
बभ्रू यामेषु शोभेते|	like two slight images of girls unrobed upon a newwrought post.
अरम म उस्रयाम्णे ऽरम अनुस्रयाम्णे|	so shine the bay steeds in their course.
बभ्रू यामेष्व अस्रिधा|	for me the bays are ready when i start or start not with the dawn innocuous in the ways they take.
वायो शुक्रो अयामि ते मध्वो अग्रं दिविष्टिषु|	vāyu the bright is offered thee best of the meath at holy rites.
आ याहि सोमपीतये सपार्हो देव नियुत्वता|	come thou to drink the soma juice god longedfor on thy teamdrawn car.
इन्द्रश च वायव एषां सोमानाम पीतिम अर्हथः|	o vāyu thou and indra are meet drinkers of these somadraughts.
युवां हि यन्तीन्दवो निम्नम आपो न सध्र्यक|	for unto you the drops proceed as waters gather to the vale.
वायव इन्द्रश च शुष्मिणा सरथं शवसस पती|	o indravāyu mighty twain speeding together lords of strength.
नियुत्वन्ता न ऊतय आ यातं सोमपीतये|	come to our succour with your team that ye may drink the soma juice.
या वां सन्ति पुरुस्प्र्हो नियुतो दाशुषे नरा|	the longedfor teams which ye possess o heroes for the worshipper.
अस्मे ता यज्ञवाहसेन्द्रवायू नि यछतम|	turn to us indravāyu ye to whom the sacrifice is paid.
यन न इन्द्रो जुजुषे यच च वष्टि तन नो महान करति शुष्म्य आ चित|	that gift of ours which indra loves and welcomes even that he makes for us the great and strong one.
बरह्म सतोमम मघवा सोमम उक्था यो अश्मानं शवसा बिभ्रद एति|	he who comes wielding in his might the thunder maghavan gives prayer praise and laud and soma.
वर्षा वर्षन्धिं चतुरश्रिम अस्यन्न उग्रो बाहुभ्यां नर्तमः शचीवान|	bull hurler of the fouredged rainproducer with both his arms strong mighty most heroic.
शरिये परुष्णीम उषमाण ऊर्णां यस्याः पर्वाणि सख्याय विव्ये|	wearing as wool paruṣṇī for adornment whose joints for sake of friendship he hath covered.
यो देवो देवतमो जायमानो महो वाजेभिर महद्भिश च शुष्मैः|	god who of all the gods was born divinest endowed with ample strength and mighty powers.
दधानो वज्रम बाह्वोर उशन्तं दयाम अमेन रेजयत पर भूम|	and bearing in his arms the yearning thunder with violent rush caused heaven and earth to tremble.
विश्वा रोधांसि परवतश च पूर्वीर दयौर रष्वाज जनिमन रेजत कषाः|	before the high god at his birth heaven trembled earth many floods and all the precipices.
आ मातरा भरति शुष्म्य आ गोर नर्वत परिज्मन नोनुवन्त वाताः|	the strong one bringeth nigh the bulls two parents loud sing the winds like men in airs midregion.
ता तू त इन्द्र महतो महानि विश्वेष्व इत सवनेषु परवाच्या|	these are thy great deeds indra thine the mighty deeds to be told aloud at all libations.
यच छूर धर्ष्णो धर्षता दध्र्ष्वान अहिं वज्रेण शवसाविवेषीः|	that thou o hero bold and boldly daring didst with thy bolt by strength destroy the dragon.
ता तू ते सत्या तुविन्र्म्ण विश्वा पर धेनवः सिस्रते वर्ष्ण ऊध्नः|	true are all these thy deeds o most heroic the milchkine issued from the streaming udder.
अधा ह तवद वर्षमणो भियानाः पर सिन्धवो जवसा चक्रमन्त|	in fear of thee o thou of manly spirit the rivers swiftly set themselves in motion.
अत्राह ते हरिवस ता उ देवीर अवोभिर इन्द्र सतवन्त सवसारः|	with joy o indra lord of tawny coursers the sisters then these goddesses extolled thee.
यत सीम अनु पर मुचो बद्बधाना दीर्घाम अनु परसितिं सयन्दयध्यै|	when thou didst give the prisoned ones their freedom to wander at their will in long succession.
पिपीळे अंशुर मद्यो न सिन्धुर आ तवा शमी शशमानस्य शक्तिः|	pressed is the gladdening stalk as twere a river so let the rite the toilers power attract thee.
अस्मद्र्यक छुशुचानस्य यम्या आशुर न रश्मिं तुव्योजसं गोः|	to usward of the bright one as the courser strains his exceedingly strong leather bridle.
अस्मे वर्षिष्ठा कर्णुहि जयेष्ठा नर्म्णानि सत्रा सहुरे सहांसि|	ever by us perform thy most heroic thine highest best victorious deeds o victor.
अस्मभ्यं वर्त्रा सुहनानि रन्धि जहि वधर वनुषो मर्त्यस्य|	for us make vṛtras easy to be conquered destroy the weapon of our mortal foeman.
अस्माकम इत सु शर्णुहि तवम इन्द्रास्मभ्यं चित्रां उप माहि वाजान|	graciously listen to our prayer o indra and strength of varied sort bestow thou on us.
अस्मभ्यं विश्वा इषणः पुरंधीर अस्माकं सु मघवन बोधि गोदाः|	send to us all intelligence arid wisdom o maghavan be he who gives us cattle.
नू षटुत इन्द्र नू गर्णान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो न पीपेः|	now indra lauded glorified with praises let wealth swell high like rivers to the singer.
अकारि ते हरिवो बरह्म नव्यं धिया सयाम रथ्यः सदासाः|	for thee a new hymn lord of bays is fashioned may we carborne through song be victors ever.
तद देवस्य सवितुर वार्यम महद वर्णीमहे असुरस्य परचेतसः|	of savitar the god the sapient asura we crave this great gift which is worthy of our choice.
छर्दिर येन दाशुषे यछति तमना तन नो महां उद अयान देवो अक्तुभिः|	wherewith he freely grants his worshiper defence this with his rays the great god hath vouchsafed to us.
दिवो धर्ता भुवनस्य परजापतिः पिशङगं दरापिम परति मुञ्चते कविः|	sustainer of the heaven lord of the whole worlds life the sage he putteth on his goldencoloured mail.
विचक्षणः परथयन्न आप्र्णन्न उर्व अजीजनत सविता सुम्नम उक्थ्यम|	clearsighted spreading far filling the spacious realm savitar hath brought forth bliss that deserveth laud.
आप्रा रजांसि दिव्यानि पार्थिवा शलोकं देवः कर्णुते सवाय धर्मणे|	he hath filled full the regions of the heaven and earth the god for his own strengthening waketh up the hymn.
पर बाहू अस्राक सविता सवीमनि निवेशयन परसुवन्न अक्तुभिर जगत|	savitar hath stretched out his arms to cherish life producing with his rays and lulling all that moves.
अदाभ्यो भुवनानि परचाकशद वरतानि देवः सविताभि रक्षते|	lighting all living creatures neer to be deceived savitar god protects each holy ordinance.
परास्राग बाहू भुवनस्य परजाभ्यो धर्तव्रतो महो अज्मस्य राजति|	he hath stretched out his arms to all the folk of earth and with his laws observed rules his own mighty course.
तरिर अन्तरिक्षं सविता महित्वना तरी रजांसि परिभुस तरीणि रोचना|	savitar thrice surrounding with his mightiness midair three regions and the triple sphere of light.
तिस्रो दिवः पर्थिवीस तिस्र इन्वति तरिभिर वरतैर अभि नो रक्षति तमना|	sets the three heavens in motion and the threefold earth and willingly protects us with his triple law.
बर्हत्सुम्नः परसवीता निवेशनो जगत सथातुर उभयस्य यो वशी|	most gracious god who brings to life and lulls to rest he who controls the world what moves not and what moves.
स नो देवः सविता शर्म यछत्व अस्मे कषयाय तरिवरूथम अंहसः|	may he vouchsafe us sheltersavitar the godfor tranquil life with triple bar against distress.
आगन देव रतुभिर वर्धतु कषयं दधातु नः सविता सुप्रजाम इषम|	with the years seasons hath savitar god come nigh may he prosper our home give food and noble sons.
स नः कषपाभिर अहभिश च जिन्वतु परजावन्तं रयिम अस्मे सम इन्वतु|	may he invigorate us through the days and nights and may he send us opulence with progeny.
को अद्य नर्यो देवकाम उशन्न इन्द्रस्य सख्यं जुजोष|	what friend of man godloving hath delighted yearning therefor this day in indras friendship.
को वा महे ऽवसे पार्याय समिद्धे अग्नौ सुतसोम ईट्टे|	who with enkindled flame and flowing soma laudeth him for his great protecting favour.
को नानाम वचसा सोम्याय मनायुर वा भवति वस्त उस्राः|	who hath with prayer bowed to the somalover what pious man endues the beams of morning.
क इन्द्रस्य युज्यं कः सखित्वं को भरात्रं वष्टि कवये क ऊती|	who seeks bond friendship brotherhood with indra who hath recourse unto the sage for succour.
को देवानाम अवो अद्या वर्णीते क आदित्यां अदितिं जयोतिर ईट्टे|	who claims today the deities protection asks aditi for light or the Ādityas.
कस्याश्विनाव इन्द्रो अग्निः सुतस्यांशोः पिबन्ति मनसाविवेनम|	of whose pressed stalk of soma drink the aśvins indra and agni wellinclined in spirit.
तस्मा अग्निर भारतः शर्म यंसज जयोक पश्यात सूर्यम उच्चरन्तम|	to him shall agni bhārata give shelter long shall he look upon the sun uprising.
य इन्द्राय सुनवामेत्य आह नरे नर्याय नर्तमाय नर्णाम|	who sayeth let us press the juice for indra mans friend the hero manliest of heroes.
न तं जिनन्ति बहवो न दभ्रा उर्व अस्मा अदितिः शर्म यंसत|	him neither few men overcome nor many to him shall aditi give spacious shelter.
परियः सुक्र्त परिय इन्द्रे मनायुः परियः सुप्रावीः परियो अस्य सोमी|	dear is the pious the devout to indra dear is the zealous dear the somabringer.
सुप्राव्यः पराशुषाळ एष वीरः सुष्वेः पक्तिं कर्णुते केवलेन्द्रः|	this hero curbs the mighty for the zealous the pressers brew indra possesses solely.
नासुष्वेर आपिर न सखा न जामिर दुष्प्राव्यो ऽवहन्तेद अवाचः|	no brother kin or friend to him who pours not destroyer of the dumb who would resist him.
न रेवता पणिना सख्यम इन्द्रो ऽसुन्वता सुतपाः सं गर्णीते|	not with the wealthy churl who pours no soma doth indra somadrinker bind alliance.
आस्य वेदः खिदति हन्ति नग्नं वि सुष्वये पक्तये केवलो भूत|	he draws away his wealth and slays him naked own friend to him who offers for oblation.
इन्द्रम परे ऽवरे मध्यमास इन्द्रं यान्तो ऽवसितास इन्द्रम|	highest and lowest men who stand between diem going returning dwelling in contentment.
इन्द्रं कषियन्त उत युध्यमाना इन्द्रं नरो वाजयन्तो हवन्ते|	those who show forth their strength when urged to battlethese are the men who call for aid on indra.
परेष्ठं वो अतिथिं सतुषे मित्रमिव परियम|	songlover like a charioteer come songs to thee when soma flows.
अग्निं रथं न वेद्यम|	o indra they have called to thee as motherkine unto their calves.
कविमिव परचेतसं यं देवासो अध दविता|	bright juices bitherward have sped thee indra lover of the song.
नि मर्त्येष्वादधुः|	drink indra of this flowing sap in every house tis set for thee.
तवं यविष्ठ दाशुषो नॄन पाहि शर्णुधी गिरः|	drink soma to inspirit thee juice indra which the falcon brought.
रक्षा तोकमुत तमना|	for thou art king and sovran lord of all the families of men.
कया ते अग्ने अङगिर ऊर्जो नपादुपस्तुतिम|	o indra hear tirascis call the call of him who serveth thee.
वराय देव मन्यवे|	satisfy him with wealth of kine and valiant offspring great art thou.
दाशेम कस्य मनसा यज्ञस्य सहसो यहो|	for he o indra hath produced for thee the newest gladdening song.
कदु वोच इदंनमः|	a hymn that springs from careful thought ancient and full of sacred truth.
अधा तवं हि नस करो विश्वा अस्मभ्यं सुक्षितीः|	that indra will we laud whom songs and hymns of praise have magnified.
वाजद्रविणसो गिरः|	striving to win we celebrate his many deeds of hero might.
कस्य नूनं परीणसो धियो जिन्वसि दम्पते|	come now and let us glorify pure indra with pure sāma hymns.
गोषाता यस्यते गिरः|	let the pure milky draught delight him strengthened by pure songs of praise.
तं मर्जयन्त सुक्रतुं पुरोयावानमाजिषु|	o indra come thou pure to us with pure assistance pure thyself.
सवेषु कषयेषुवाजिनम|	pure send thou riches down to us and meet for soma pure be glad.
कषेति कषेमेभिः साधुभिर्नकिर्यं घनन्ति हन्ति यः|	o indra pure vouchsafe us wealth and pure enrich the worshipper.
अग्ने सुवीर एधते|	pure thou dost strike the vṛtras dead and strivest pure to win the spoil.
इन्द्राग्नी युवं सु नः सहन्ता दासथो रयिम|	indra and agni surely ye as conquerors will give us wealth.
येन दर्ळ्हा समत्स्वा वीळु चित साहिषीमह्यग्निर्वनेव वात इन नभन्तामन्यके समे|	whereby in fight we may oercome that which is strong and firmly fixed as agni burns the woods with wind let all the others die away.
नहि वां वव्रयामहेअथेन्द्रमिद यजामहे शविष्ठं नर्णां नरम|	we set no snares to tangle you indra we worship and adore hero of heroes mightiest.
स नः कदा चिदर्वता गमदा वाजसातयेगमदा मेधसातये नभन्तामन्यके समे|	once may he come unto us with his steed come unto us to win us strength and to complete the sacrifice.
ता हि मध्यं भराणामिन्द्राग्नी अधिक्षितः|	for famous indraagni ye are dwellers in the midst of frays.
ता उ कवित्वना कवी पर्छ्यमाना सखीयते सं धीतमश्नुतं नरा नभन्तामन्यके समे|	sages in wisdom ye are knit to him who seeketh you as friends heroes bestow on him his wish.
अभ्यर्च नभाकवदिन्द्राग्नी यजसा गिरा|	nabhākalike with sacred song indras and agnis praise i sing.
ययोर्विश्वमिदं जगदियं दयौः पर्थिवी मह्युपस्थे बिभ्र्तो वसु नभन्तामन्यके समे|	theirs to whom all this world belongs this heaven and this mighty earth which bear rich treasure in their lap.
पर बरह्माणि नभाकवदिन्द्राग्निभ्यामिरज्यत|	to indra and to agni send your prayers as was nabhākas wont.
या सप्तबुध्नमर्णवं जिह्मबारमपोर्णुत इन्द्र ईशान ओजसा नभन्तामन्यके समे|	who oped with sideway opening the sea with its foundations sevenindra all powerful in his might.
अपि वर्श्च पुराणवद वरततेरिव गुष्पितमोजो दासस्य दम्भय|	tear thou asunder as of old like tangles of a creeping plant.
वयं तदस्य सम्भ्र्तं वस्विन्द्रेण वि भजेमहि नभन्तामन्यके समे|	demolish thou the dāsas might may we with indras help divide the treasure he hath gathered up.
यदिन्द्राग्नी जना इमे विह्वयन्ते तना गिरा|	what time with this same song these men call indraagni sundry ways.
अस्माकेभिर्न्र्भिर्वयं सासह्याम पर्तन्यतो वनुयाम वनुष्यतो नभन्तामन्यके समे|	may we with our own heroes quell those who provoke us to the fight and conquer those who strive with us.
या नु शवेताववो दिव उच्चरात उप दयुभिः|	the two refulgent with their beams rise and come downward from the sky.
इन्द्राग्न्योरनु वरतमुहाना यन्ति सिन्धवो यान सीं बन्धादमुञ्चतां नभन्तामन्यके समे|	by indras and by agnis hest flowing away the rivers run which they released from their restraint.
पूर्वीष ट इन्द्रोपमातयः पूर्वीरुत परशस्तयः सूनोहिन्वस्य हरिवः|	o indra many are thine aids many thy ways of guiding us.
वस्वो वीरस्याप्र्चो या नु साधन्त नो धियो नभन्तामन्यके समे|	lord of the bay steeds hinvas son to a good hero come our prayers which soon shall have accomplishment.
तं शिशीता सुव्र्क्तिभिस्त्वेषं सत्वानं रग्मियम|	inspire him with your holy hymns the hero bright and glorious.
उतो नुचिद य ओजसा शुष्णस्याण्डानि भेदति जेषत सवर्वतीरपो नभन्तामन्यके समे|	him who with might demolisheth even the brood of Śuṣṇa and winneth for us the heavenly streams.
तं शिशीता सवध्वरं सत्यं सत्वानं रत्वियम|	inspire him worshipped with fair rites the glorious hero truly brave.
उतो नुचिद य ओहत आण्डा शुष्णस्य भेदत्यजैः सवर्वतीरपो नभन्तामन्यके समे|	he brake in pieces Śuṣṇas brood who still expected not the stroke and won for us the heavenly streams let all the others die away.
एवेन्द्राग्निभ्यां पित्र्वन नवीयो मन्धात्र्वदङगिरस्वदवाचि|	thus have we sung anew to indraagni as sang our sires aṅgirases and mandhātar.
तरिधातुना शर्मणा पातमस्मान वयं सयाम पतयो रयीणाम|	guard us with triple shelter and preserve us may we be masters of a store of riches.
वयं घ तवा सुतावन्त आपो न वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	we compass thee like waters we whose grass is trimmed and soma pressed.
पवित्रस्यप्रस्रवणेषु वर्त्रहन परि सतोतार आसते|	here where the filter pours its stream thy worshippers round thee o vṛtraslayer sit.
सवरन्ति तवा सुते नरो वसो निरेक उक्थिनः|	men vasu by the soma with lauds call thee to the foremost place.
कदा सुतं तर्षाण ओक आ गम इन्द्र सवब्दीव वंसगः|	when comest thou athirst unto the juice as home o indra like a bellowing bull.
कण्वेभिर्ध्र्ष्णवा धर्षद वाजं दर्षि सहस्रिणम|	boldly bold hero bring us spoil in thousands for the kaṇvas sake.
पिशङगरूपं मघवन विचर्षणे मक्षू गोमन्तमीमहे|	o active maghavan with eager prayer we crave the yellowhued with store ol kine.
पाहि गायान्धसो मद इन्द्राय मेध्यातिथे|	medhyātithi to indra sing drink of the juice to make thee glad.
यः सम्मिश्लोहर्योर्यः सुते सचा वज्री रथो हिरण्ययः|	closeknit to his bay steeds boltarmed beside the juice is he his chariot is of gold.
यः सुषव्यः सुदक्षिण इनो यः सुक्रतुर्ग्र्णे|	he who is praised as strong of hand both right and left most wise and hold.
य आकरः सहस्रा यः शतामघ इन्द्रो यः पूर्भिदारितः|	indra who rich in hundreds gathers thousands up honoured as breakerdown of forts.
यो धर्षितो योअव्र्तो यो अस्ति शमश्रुषु शरितः|	the bold of heart whom none provokes who stands in bearded confidence.
विभूतद्युम्नश्च्यवनः पुरुष्टुतः करत्वा गौरिव शाकिनः|	muchlauded very glorious overthrowing foes strong helper like a bull with might.
क ईं वेद सुते सचा पिबन्तं कद वयो दधे|	who knows what vital ower he wins drinking beside the flowing juice.
अयं यःपुरो विभिनत्त्योजसा मन्दानः शिप्र्यन्धसः|	this is the fairchecked god who joying in the draught breaks down the castles in his strength.
दाना मर्गो न वारणः पुरुत्रा चरथं दधे|	as a wild elephant rushes on this way and that way mad with heat.
नकिष टवा नि यमदा सुते गमो महांश्चरस्योजसा|	none may compel thee yet come hither to the draught thou movest mighty in thy power.
य उग्रः सन्ननिष्ट्र्त सथिरो रणाय संस्क्र्तः|	when he the mighty neer oerthrown steadfast made ready for the fight.
यदि सतोतुर्मघवा शर्णवद धवं नेन्द्रो योषत्या गमत|	when indra maghavan lists to his praisers call he will not stand aloof but come.
सत्यमित्था वर्षेदसि वर्षजूतिर्नोअव्र्तः|	yea verily thou art a bull with a bulls rush whom none may stay.
वर्षा हयुग्र शर्ण्विषे परावति वर्षो अर्वावति शरुतः|	thou mighty one art celebrated as a bull famed as a bull both near and far.
वर्षणस्ते अभीशवो वर्षा कशा हिरण्ययी|	thy reins are very bulls in strength bulls strength is in thy golden whip.
वर्षा रथो मघवन वर्षणा हरी वर्षा तवं सतक्रतो|	thy car o maghavan thy bays are strong as bulls thou Śatakratu art a bull.
वर्षा सोता सुनोतु ते वर्षन्न्र्जीपिन्ना भर|	let the strong presser press for thee bring hither thou straightrushing bull.
वर्षा दधन्वे वर्षणं नदीष्वा तुभ्यं सथातर्हरीणाम|	the mighty makes the mighty run in flowing streams for thee whom thy bay horses bear.
एन्द्र याहि पीतये मधु शविष्ठ सोम्यम|	come thou most potent indra come to drink the savoury soma juice.
नायमछा मघवा शर्णवद गिरो बरह्मोक्था च सुक्रतुः|	maghavan very wise will quickly come to hear the songs the prayer the hymns of praise.
वहन्तु तवा रथेष्ठामा हरयो रथयुजः|	when thou hast mounted on thy car let thy yoked bay steeds carry thee.
तिरश्चिदर्यं सवनानि वर्त्रहन्नन्येषां या शतक्रतो|	past other mens libations lord of hundred powers thee vṛtraslayer thee our friend.
अस्माकमद्यान्तमं सतोमं धिष्व महामह|	o thou most lofty one accept our laud as nearest to thine heart.
अस्माकं ते सवना सन्तु शन्तमा मदाय दयुक्ष सोमपाः|	may our libations be most sweet to make thee glad o somadrinker heavenly lord.
नहि षस्तव नो मम शास्त्रे अन्यस्य रण्यति|	neither in thy decree nor mine but in anothers he delights.
यो अस्मान्वीर आनयत|	the man who brought us unto this.
इन्द्रश्चिद घा तदब्रवीत सत्रिया अशास्यं मनः|	indra himself hath said the mind of woman brooks not discipline.
उतो अह करतुं रघुम|	her intellect hath little weight.
सप्ती चिद घा मदच्युता मिथुना वहतो रथम|	his pair of horses rushing on in their wild transport draw his car.
एवेद धूर्व्र्ष्ण उत्तरा|	highlifted is the stallions yoke.
अधः पश्यस्व मोपरि सन्तरां पादकौ हर|	cast down thine eyes and look not up more closely set thy feet let none.
मा ते कषप्लकौ दर्शन सत्री हि बरह्मा बभूविथ|	see what thy garment veils for thou a brahman hast become a dame.
ईळिष्वा हि परतीव्यं यजस्व जातवेदसम|	worship thou jātavedas pray to him who willingly accepts.
चरिष्णुधूममग्र्भीतशोचिषम|	whose smoke wanders at will and none may grasp his flame.
दामानं विश्वचर्षणेअग्निं विश्वमनो गिरा|	thou all mens friend visvamanas exaltest agni with thy song.
उत सतुषे विष्पर्धसो रथानाम|	the giver and his flames with which no cars contend.
येषामाबाध रग्मिय इषः पर्क्षश्च निग्रभे|	whose resolute assault to win vigour and food deserves our praise.
उपविदावह्निर्विन्दते वसु|	through whose discovering power the priest obtaineth wealth.
उदस्य शोचिरस्थाद दीदियुषो वयजरम|	up springs the imperishable flame the flame of the refulgent one.
तपुर्जम्भस्य सुद्युतो गणश्रियः|	most bright with glowing jaws and glory in his train.
उदु तिष्ठ सवध्वर सतवानो देव्या कर्पा|	skilled in fair sacrifice extolled arise in godlike loveliness.
अभिख्या भासा बर्हता शुशुक्वनिः|	shining with lofty splendour with effulgent light.
अग्ने याहि सुशस्तिभिर्हव्या जुह्वान आनुषक|	called straight to our oblations come o agni through our eulogies.
यथा दूतो बभूथ हव्यवाहनः|	as thou hast been our envoy bearing up our gifts.
अग्निं वः पूर्व्यं हुवे होतारं चर्षणीनाम|	i call your agni from of old invoking priest of living men.
तमया वाचा गर्णे तमु व सतुषे|	him with this song i laud and magnify for you.
यज्ञेभिरद्भुतक्रतुं यं कर्पा सूदयन्त इत|	whom wondrous wise they animate with solemn rites and his fair form.
मित्रं न जने सुधितं रतावनि|	kind as a friend to men who keep the holy law.
रतावानं रतायवो यज्ञस्य साधनं गिरा|	him true to law who perfecteth the sacrifice lawloving ones.
उपो एनं जुजुषुर्नमसस पदे|	ye with your song have gratified in the place of prayer.
अछा नो अङगिरस्तमं यज्ञासो यन्तु संयतः|	may all our sacrifices go to him the truest aṅgiras.
होता यो अस्ति विक्ष्वा यशस्तमः|	who is among mankind the most illustrious priest.
अग्ने तव तये अजरेन्धानासो बर्हद भाः|	imperishable agni thine are all these high enkindled lights.
अश्वा इव वर्षणस्तविषीयवः|	like horses and like stallions showing forth their strength.
स तवं न ऊर्जां पते रयिं रास्व सुवीर्यम|	so give us lord of power and might riches combined with hero strength.
पराव नस्तोके तनये समत्स्वा|	and guard us with our sons and grand sons in our frays.
यद वा उ विश्पतिः शितः सुप्रीतो मनुषो विसि|	soon as the eager lord of men is friendly unto mantis race.
विश्वेदग्निः परति रक्षांसि सेधति|	agni averteth from us all the demon host.
शरुष्ट्यग्ने नवस्य मे सतोमस्य वीर विश्पते|	o hero agni lord of men on hearing this new laud of mine.
नि मायिनस्तपुष रक्षसो दह|	burn down the rākṣasas enchanters with thy flame.
न तस्य मायया चन रिपुरीशीत मर्त्यः|	no mortal foe can eer prevail by arts of magic over him.
यो अग्नये ददाश हव्यदातिभिः|	who serveth agni well with sacrificial gifts.
वयश्वस्त्वा वसुविदमुक्षण्युरप्रीणाद रषिः|	vyaśva the sage who sought the bull hath won thee finder of good things.
महो रयेतमु तवा समिधीमहि|	as such may we enkindle thee for ample wealth.
उशना कव्यस्त्वा नि होतारमसादयत|	uśanā kāvya stablished thee o agni as invoking priest.
आयजिं तवा मनवेजातवेदसम|	thee jātavedas sacrificing priest for man.
विश्वे हि तवा सजोषसो देवासो दूतमक्रत|	all deities of one accord appointed thee their messenger.
शरुष्टी देव परथमो यज्ञियो भुवः|	thou god through hearing hadst first claim to sacrifice.
इमं घा वीरो अम्र्तं दूतं कर्ण्वीत मर्त्यः|	him may the mortal hero make his own immortal messenger.
पावकंक्र्ष्णवर्तनिं विहायसम|	farspreading purifier him whose path is black.
तं हुवेम यतस्रुचः सुभासं शुक्रशोचिषम|	with lifted ladles let us call him splendid with his brilliant flame.
विशामग्निमजरं परत्नमीड्यम|	mens ancient agni wasting not adorable.
यो अस्मै हव्यदातिभिराहुतिं मर्तोअविधत|	the man who pays the worship due to him with sacrificial gifts.
भूरि पोषंस धत्ते वीरवद यशः|	obtains both plenteous nourishment and hero fame.
परथमं जातवेदसमग्निं यज्ञेषु पूर्व्यम|	to jātavedas agni chief in sacrifices first of all.
परति सरुगेति नमसा हविष्मती|	with homage goes the ladle rich with sacred gifts.
आभिर्विधेमाग्नये जयेष्ठाभिर्व्यश्ववत|	even as vyatya did may we with these most high and liberal hymns.
मंहिष्ठाभिर्मतिभिः शुक्रशोचिषे|	pay worship unto agni of the splendid flame.
नूनमर्च विहायसे सतोमेभिः सथूरयूपवत|	now sing as sthurayupa sang with lands to him who spreadeth far.
रषे वैयश्वदम्यायाग्नये|	to agni of the home o Ṛṣi vyaśvas son.
अतिथिं मानुषाणां सूनुं वनस्पतीनाम|	as welcome guest of human kind as offspring of the forest kings.
विप्रा अग्निमवसे परत्नमीळते|	the sages worship ancient agni for his aid.
महो विश्वानभि षतोअभि हव्यानि मानुषा|	for mens oblations brought to him who is the mighty lord of all.
अग्ने नि षत्सि नमसाधि बर्हिषि|	sit agni mid our homage on the sacred grass.
वंस्वा नो वार्या पुरु वंस्व रायः पुरुस्प्र्हः|	grant us abundant treasures grant the opulence which many crave.
सुवीर्यस्य परजावतो यशस्वतः|	with store of heroes progeny and high renown.
तवं वरो सुषाम्णेअग्ने जनाय चोदय|	agni most youthful of the gods send evermore the gift of wealth.
सदा वसो रातिं यविष्ठ शश्वते|	unto varosusaman and to all his folk.
तवं हि सुप्रतूरसि तवं नो गोमतीरिषः|	a mighty conqueror art thou o agni so disclose to us.
महो रायः सातिमग्ने अपा वर्धि|	food in our herds of kine and gain of ample wealth.
अग्ने तवं यशा अस्या मित्रावरुणा वह|	thou agni art a glorious god bring hither mitra varuṇa.
रतावाना सम्राजा पूतदक्षसा|	imperial sovrans holyminded true to law.
यदिन्द्र परागपागुदं नयग वा हूयसे नर्भिः|	though indra thou art called by men eastward and westward north and south.
सिमा पुरू नर्षूतो अस्यानवेअसि परशर्ध तुर्वशे|	thou chiefly art with Ānava and turvaśa brave champion i urged by men to come.
यद वा रुमे रुशमे शयावके कर्प इन्द्र मादयसे सचा|	or indra when with ruma ruśama Śyāvaka and kṛpa thou rejoicest thee.
कण्वासस्त्वा बरह्मभि सतोमवाहस इन्द्रा यछन्त्या गहि|	still do the kaṇvas bringing praises with their prayers o indra draw thee hither come.
यथा गौरो अपा कर्तं तर्ष्यन्नेत्यवेरिणम|	even as the wildbull when he thirsts goes to the deserts watery pool.
आपित्वे नः परपित्वे तूयमा गहि कण्वेषु सु सचा पिब|	come hither quickly both at morning and at eve and with the kaṇvas drink thy fill.
मन्दन्तु तवा मघवन्निन्द्रेन्दवो राधोदेयाय सुन्वते|	may the drops gladden thee rich indra and obtain bounty for him who pours the juice.
आमुष्या सोममपिबश्चमू सुतं जयेष्ठं तद दधिषे सहः|	soma pressed in the mortar didst thou take and drink and hence hast won surpassing might.
पर चक्रे सहसा सहो बभञ्ज मन्युमोजसा|	with mightier strength he conquered strength with energy he crushed their wrath.
विश्वे त इन्द्र पर्तनायवो यहो नि वर्क्षा इव येमिरे|	o indra strong in youth all those who sought the fray bent and bowed down to thee like trees.
सहस्रेणेव सचते यवीयुधा यस्त आनळ उपस्तुतिं पुत्रं परावर्गं कर्णुते सुवीर्ये दाश्नोति नमौक्तिभिः|	he who wins promise of thine aid goes girt as with a thousand mighty men of war.
मा भेम मा शरमिष्मोग्रस्य सख्ये तव|	he makes his son preeminent in hero might he serves with reverential prayer.
महत ते वर्ष्णो अभिचक्ष्यं कर्तं पश्येम तुर्वशं यदुम|	with thee the mighty for our friend we will not fear or feel fatigue.
सव्यामनु सफिग्यं वावसे वर्षा न दानो अस्य रोषति|	may we see turvaśa and yadu thy great deed o hero must be glorified.
मध्वा सम्प्र्क्ताः सारघेण धेनवस्तूयमेहि दरवा पिब|	on his left hip the hero hath reclined himself the proffered feast offends him not.
अश्वी रथी सुरूप इद गोमानिदिन्द्र ते सखा|	the milk is blended with the honey of the bee quickly come hither baste and drink.
शवात्रभजा वयसा सचते सदा चन्द्रो याति सभामुप|	indra thy friend is fair of form and rich in horses cars and kine.
रश्यो न तर्ष्यन्नवपानमा गहि पिबा सोमं वशाननु|	he evermore hath food accompanied by wealth and radiant joins the company.
निमेघमानो मघवन दिवेदिव ओजिष्ठं दधिषे सहः|	come like a thirsty antelope to the drinkingplace drink soma to thy hearts desire.
अध्वर्यो दरावया तवं सोममिन्द्रः पिपासति|	raining it down o maghavan day after day thou gainest thy surpassing might.
उप नूनंयुयुजे वर्षणा हरी आ च जगाम वर्त्रहा|	priest let the soma juice flow forth for indra longs to drink thereof.
सवयं चित स मन्यते दाशुरिर्जनो यत्रा सोमस्य तर्म्पसि|	he even now hath yoked his vigorous bay steeds the vṛtraslayer hath come near.
इदं ते अन्नं युज्यं समुक्षितं तस्येहि पर दरवा पिब|	the man with whom thou fillcst thee with soma deems himself a pious worshipper.
रथेष्ठायाध्वर्यवः सोममिन्द्राय सोतन|	this thine appropriate food is here poured out for thee come hasten forward drink of it.
अधि बरध्नस्याद्रयो वि चक्षते सुन्वन्तो दाश्वध्वरम|	press out the soma juice ye priests for indra borne upon his car.
उप बरध्नं वावाता वर्षणा हरी इन्द्रमपसु वक्षतः|	the pressingstones speak loud of indra while they shed the juice which offered honours him.
अर्वाञ्चं तवा सप्तयोअध्वरश्रियो वहन्तु सवनेदुप|	to the brown juice may his dear vigorous bay steeds bring indra to our holy task.
पर पूषणं वर्णीमहे युज्याय पुरूवसुम|	hither let thy carsteeds who seek the sacrifice bring thee to our drinkofferings.
स शक्र शिक्ष पुरुहूत नो धिया तुजे राये विमोचन|	pūṣan the lord of ample wealth for firm alliance we elect.
सं नः शिशीहि भुरिजोरिव कषुरं रास्व रायो विमोचन|	may he with wisdom Śakra looser muchinvoked aid us to riches and to seed.
तवे तन नः सुवेदमुस्रियं वसु यं तवं हिनोषि मर्त्यम|	sharpen us like a razor in the barbers hands send riches thou who settest free.
वेमि तवा पूषन्न्र्ञ्जसे वेमि सतोतव आघ्र्णे|	easy to find with thee are treasures of the dawn for mortal man whom thou dost speed.
न तस्य वेम्यरणं हि तद वसो सतुषे पज्राय साम्ने|	pūṣan i long to win thy love i long to praise thee radiant god.
परा गावो यवसं कच्चिदाघ्र्णे नित्यं रेक्णो अमर्त्य|	excellent lord tis strange tome no wish have i to sing the psalm that pajra sings.
अस्माकं पूषन्नविता शिवो भव मंहिष्ठो वाजसातये|	my kine o radiant god seek pasture where they will my during wealth immortal one.
सथूरं राधः शताश्वं कुरुङगस्य दिविष्टिषु|	be our protector pūṣan be most liberal lord propitious to our gathering strength.
राज्ञस्त्वेषस्य सुभगस्य रातिषु तुर्वशेष्वमन्महि|	rich was the gift kurunga gave a hundred steeds at morning rites.
धीभिः सातानि काण्वस्य वाजिनः परियमेधैरभिद्युभिः|	among the gifts of turvaśas we thought of him the opulent the splendid king.
षष्टिं सहस्रानु निर्मजामजे निर्यूथानि गवां रषिः|	what by his morning songs kaṇva the powerful hath with the priyamedhas gained.
वर्क्षाश्चिन मे अभिपित्वे अरारणुः|	the herds of sixty thousand pure and spotless kine have i the Ṛṣi driven away.
गां भजन्त मेहनाश्वं भजन्त मेहन|	the very trees were joyful at my coming kine they obtained in plenty steeds in plenty.
नहि वो अस्त्यर्भको देवासो न कुमारकः|	not one of you ye gods is small none of you is a feeble child.
विश्वे सतोमहान्त इत|	all of you verily are great.
इति सतुतासो असथा रिशादसो ये सथ तरयश्च तरिंशच्च|	thus be ye lauded ye destroyers of the foe ye threeandthirty deities.
मनोर्देवा यज्ञियासः|	the gods of man the holy ones.
ते नस्त्राध्वं तेअवत त उ नो अधि वोचत|	as such defend and succour us with benedictions speak to us.
मा नः पथः पित्र्यान मानवादधि दूरं नैष्ट परावतः|	lead us not from our fathers and from manus path into the distance far away.
ये देवास इह सथन विश्वे वैश्वानरा उत|	ye deities who stay with us and all ye gods of all mankind.
अस्मभ्यं शर्म सप्रथो गवेअश्वाय यछत|	give us your wide protection give shelter for cattle and for steed.
पर सम्राजं चर्षणीनामिन्द्रं सतोता नव्यं गीर्भिः|	praise indra whom our songs must laud sole sovran of mankind the chief.
नरं नर्षाहं मंहिष्ठम|	most liberal who controlleth men.
यस्मिन्नुक्थानि रण्यन्ति विश्वानि च शरवस्या|	in whom the hymns of praise delight and all the glorygiving songs.
अपामवोन समुद्रे|	like the floods longing for the sea.
तं सुष्टुत्या विवासे जयेष्ठराजं भरे कर्त्नुम|	him i invite with eulogy best king effective in the fight.
महो वाजिनं सनिभ्यः|	strong for the gain of mighty spoil.
यस्यानूना गभीरा मदा उरवस्तरुत्राः|	whose perfect ecstasies are wide profound victorious and give.
हर्षुमन्तःशूरसातौ|	joy in the field where heroes win.
तमिद धनेषु हितेष्वधिवाकाय हवन्ते|	him when the spoils of war are staked men call to be their advocate.
येषामिन्द्रस्ते जयन्ति|	they who have indra win the day.
तमिच्च्यौत्नैरार्यन्ति तं कर्तेभिश्चर्षणयः|	men honour him with stirring songs and magnify with solemn rites.
एषैन्द्रो वरिवस्क्र्त|	indra is he who giveth case.
इन्द्रो बरह्मेन्द्र रषिरिन्द्रः पुरू पुरुहूतः|	indra is priest and Ṛṣi he is much invoked by many men.
महान महीभिः शचीभिः|	and mighty by his mighty powers.
स सतोम्यः स हव्यः सत्यः सत्वा तुविकूर्मिः|	meet to be lauded and invoked true hero with his deeds of might.
एकश्चित्सन्नभिभूतिः|	victorious even when alone.
तमर्केभिस्तं सामभिस्तं गायत्रैश्चर्षणयः|	the men the people magnify that indra with their slina songs.
इन्द्रं वर्धन्ति कषितयः|	with hymns and sacred eulogies.
परणेतारं वस्यो अछा कर्तारं जयोतिः समत्सु|	him who advances them to wealth sends light to lead them in the war.
सासह्वांसं युधामित्रान|	and quells their foemen in the fray.
स नः पप्रिः पारयाति सवस्ति नावा पुरुहूतः|	may he the saviour muchinvoked may indra bear us in a ship.
इन्द्रो विश्वा अति दविषः|	safely beyond all enemies.
स तवं न इन्द्र वाजेभिर्दशस्या च गातुया च|	as such o indra honour us with gifts of booty further us.
अछा चनः सुम्नं नेषि|	and lead us to felicity.
सवादोरभक्षि वयसः सुमेधाः सवाध्यो वरिवोवित्तरस्य|	wisely have i enjoyed the savoury viand religiousthoughted best to find out treasure.
विश्वे यं देवा उत मर्त्यासो मधु बरुवन्तो अभि संचरन्ति|	the food to which all deities and mortals calling it meath gather themselves together.
अन्तश्च परागा अदितिर्भवास्यवयाता हरसो दैव्यस्य|	tlou shalt be aditi as thou hast entered within appeaser of celestial anger.
इन्दविन्द्रस्य सख्यं जुषाणः शरौष्टीव धुरमनु राय रध्याः|	indu enjoying indras friendship bring usas a swift steed the carforward to riches.
अपाम सोममम्र्ता अभूमागन्म जयोतिरविदाम देवान|	we have drunk soma and become immortal we have attained the light the gods discovered.
किं नूनमस्मान कर्णवदरातिः किमु धूर्तिरम्र्त मर्त्यस्य|	now what may foemans malice do to harm us what o immortal mortal mans deception.
शं नो भव हर्द आ पीत इन्दो पितेव सोम सूनवे सुशेवः|	absorbed into the heart be sweet o indu as a kind father to his son o soma.
सखेव सख्य उरुशंस धीरः पर ण आयुर्जीवसे सोमतारीः|	as a wise friend to friend do thou wideruler o soma lengthen out our days for living.
इमे मा पीता यशस उरुष्यवो रथं न गावः समनाहपर्वसु|	these glorious drops that give me freedom have i drunk closely they knit my joints as straps secure a car.
ते मा रक्षन्तु विस्रसश्चरित्रादुत मा सरामाद्यवयन्त्विन्दवः|	let them protect my foot from slipping on the way yea let the drops i drink preserve me from disease.
अग्निं न मा मथितं सं दिदीपः पर चक्षय कर्णुहि वस्यसो नः|	make me shine bright like fire produced by friction give us a clearer sight and make us better.
अथा हि ते मद आ सोम मन्ये रेवानिव पर चरापुष्टिमछ|	for in carouse i think of thee o soma shall i as a rich man attain to comfort.
इषिरेण ते मनसा सुतस्य भक्षीमहि पित्र्यस्येव रायः|	may we enjoy with an enlivened spirit the juice thou givest like ancestral riches.
सोम राजन पर ण आयूंषि तारीरहानीव सूर्यो वासराणि|	o soma king prolong thou our existence as sūrya makes the shining days grow longer.
सोम राजन मर्ळया नः सवस्ति तव समसि वरत्यास्तस्य विद्धि|	king soma favour us and make us prosper we are thy devotees of this be mindful.
अलर्ति दक्ष उत मन्युरिन्दो मा नो अर्यो अनुकामं परादाः|	spirit and power are fresh in us o indu give us not up unto our foemans pleasure.
तवं हि नस्तन्वः सोम गोपा गात्रेगात्रे निषसत्था नर्चक्षाः|	for thou hast settled in each joint o soma aim of mens eyes and guardian of our bodies.
यत ते वयं परमिनाम वरतानि स नो मर्ळ सुषखादेव वस्यः|	when we offend against thine holy statutes as a kind friend god best of all be gracious.
रदूदरेण साख्या सचेय यो मा न रिष्येद धर्यश्व पीतः|	may i be with the friend whose heart is tender who lord of bays when quaffed will never harm me.
अयं यः सोमो नयधाय्यस्मे तस्मा इन्द्रं परतिरमेम्यायुः|	this soma now deposited within me for this i pray for longer life to indra.
अप तया अस्थुरनिरा अमीवा निरत्रसन तमिषीचीरभैषुः|	our maladies have lost their strength and vanished they feared and passed away into the darkness.
आ सोमो अस्मानरुहद विहाया अगन्म यत्र परतिरन्त आयुः|	soma hath risen in us exceeding mighty and we are come where men prolong existence.
यो न इन्दुः पितरो हर्त्सु पीतोअमर्त्यो मर्त्यानाविवेश|	fathers that indu which our hearts have drunken immortal in himself hath entered mortals.
तस्मै सोमाय हविषा विधेम मर्ळीके अस्य सुमतौ सयाम|	so let us serve this soma with oblation and rest securely in his grace and favour.
तवं सोम पित्र्भिः संविदानोअनु दयावाप्र्थिवी आ ततन्थ|	associate with the fathers thou o soma hast spread thyself abroad through earth and heaven.
तस्मै त इन्दो हविषा विधेम वयं सयाम पतयो रयीणाम|	so with oblation let us serve thee indu and so let us become the lords of riches.
तरातारो देवा अधि वोचता नो मा नो निद्रा ईशत मोत जल्पिः|	give us your blessing o ye gods preservers never may sleep or idle talk control us.
वयं सोमस्य विश्वह परियासः सुवीरासो विदथमावदेम|	but evermore may we as friends of soma speak to the synod with brave sons around us.
तवं नः सोम विश्वतो वयोधास्त्वं सवर्विदा विशा नर्चक्षाः|	on all sides soma thou art our lifegiver aim of all eyes lightfinder come within us.
तवं न इन्द ऊतिभिः सजोषाः पाहि पश्चातादुत वा पुरस्तात|	indu of one accord with thy protections both from behind and from before preserve us.
यदिन्द्र परागपागुदं नयग वा हूयसे नर्भिः|	not to forsake me i invoke this indra girt by maruts.
आ याहि तूयमाशुभिः|	lord of magic power who rules with might.
यद वा परस्रवणे दिवो मादयासे सवर्णरे|	this indra with his marut friends clave into pieces vṛtras bead.
यद वा समुद्रेन्धसः|	with hundredknotted thunderbolt.
आ तवा गीर्भिर्महामुरुं हुवे गामिव भोजसे|	indra with marut friends grown strong hath rent asunder vṛtra and.
इन्द्र सोमस्य पीतये|	released the waters of the sea.
आ त इन्द्र महिमानं हरयो देव ते महः|	this is that indra who begirt by maruts won the light of heaven.
रथे वहन्तु बिभ्रतः|	that he might drink the soma juice.
इन्द्र गर्णीष उ सतुषे महानुग्र ईशानक्र्त|	mighty impetuous begirt by maruts him who loudly roars.
एहि नः सुतं पिब|	indra we invocate with songs.
सुतावन्तस्त्वा वयं परयस्वन्तो हवामहे|	indra begirt by maruts we invoke after the ancient plan.
इदं नो बर्हिरासदे|	that he may drink the soma juice.
यच्चिद धि शश्वतामसीन्द्र साधारणस्त्वम|	o liberal indra marutgirt muchlauded Śatakratu drink.
तं तवा वयं हवामहे|	the soma at this sacrifice.
इदं ते सोम्यं मध्वधुक्षन्नद्रिभिर्नरः|	to thee o indra marutgirt these soma juices thunderer.
जुषाण इन्द्र तत पिब|	are offered from the heart with lauds.
विश्वानर्यो विपश्चितोअति खयस्तूयमा गहि|	drink indra with thy marut friends pressed soma at the morning rites.
अस्मे धेहिश्रवो बर्हत|	whetting thy thunderbolt with strength.
दाता मे पर्षतीनां राजा हिरण्यवीनाम|	arising in thy might thy jaws thou shookest indra having quaffed.
मा देवा मघवा रिषत|	the soma which the mortar pressed.
सहस्रे पर्षतीनामधि शचन्द्रं बर्हत पर्थु|	indra both worlds complained to thee when uttering thy fearful roar.
शुक्रं हिरण्यमा ददे|	what time thou smotest dasyus dead.
नपातो दुर्गहस्य मे सहस्रेण सुराधसः|	from indra have i measured out a song eightfooted with nine parts.
शरवो देवेष्वक्रत|	delicate faithful to the law.
तं वभि पर गायत पुरुहूतं पुरुष्टुतम|	sing forth to him whom many men invoke to him whom many laud.
इन्द्रं गीर्भिस्तविषमा विवासत|	invite the powerful indra with your songs of praise.
यस्य दविबर्हसो बर्हत सहो दाधार रोदसी|	whose lofty mightfor doubly strong is hesupports the heavens and earth.
गिरीन्रज्रानपः सवर्व्र्षत्वना|	and hills and plains and floods and light with manly power.
स राजसि पुरुष्टुत एको वर्त्राणि जिघ्नसे|	such praised by many thou art king alone thou smitest vṛtras dead.
इन्द्र जैत्रा शरवस्या च यन्तवे|	to gain o indra spoils of war and high renown.
तं ते मदं गर्णीमसि वर्षणं पर्त्सु सासहिम|	we sing this strong and wild delight of thine which conquers in the fray.
उ लोकक्र्त्नुमद्रिवो हरिश्रियम|	which caster of the stone gives room and shines like gold.
येन जयोतींष्यायवे मनवे च विवेदिथ|	wherewith thou also foundest lights for Āyu and for manus sake.
मन्दानो अस्य बर्हिषो वि राजसि|	now joying in this sacred grass thou beamest forth.
तदद्या चित त उक्थिनोअनु षटुवन्ति पूर्वथा|	this day too singers of the hymn praise as of old this might of thine.
वर्षपत्नीरपो जया दिवेदिवे|	win thou the waters day by day thralls of the strong.
तव तयदिन्द्रियं बर्हत तव शुष्ममुत करतुम|	that lofty indrapower of thine thy strength and thine intelligence.
वज्रं शिशाति धिषणा वरेण्यम|	thy thunderbolt for which we long the wish makes keen.
तव दयौरिन्द्र पौंस्यं पर्थिवी वर्धति शरवः|	o indra heaven and earth augment thy manly power and thy renown.
तवामापः पर्वतासश्च हिन्विरे|	the waters and thy mountains stir and urge thee on.
तवां विष्णुर्ब्र्हन कषयो मित्रो गर्णाति वरुणः|	viṣṇu the lofty ruling power varuṇa mitra sing thy praise.
तवांशर्धो मदत्यनु मारुतम|	in thee the marut3 company have great delight.
तवं वर्षा जनानां मंहिष्ठ इन्द्र जज्ञिषे|	o indra thou wast born the lord of men most liberal of thy gifts.
सत्रा विश्वा सवपत्यानि दधिषे|	excellent deeds for evermore are all thine own.
सत्रा तवं पुरुष्टुत एको वर्त्राणि तोशसे|	ever alone o highlypraised thou sendest vṛtras to their rest.
नान्य इन्द्रात्करणं भूय इन्वति|	none else than indra executes the mighty deed.
यदिन्द्र मन्मशस्त्वा नाना हवन्त ऊतये|	though here and there in varied hymns indra men call on thee for aid.
अस्माकेभिर्न्र्भिरत्रा सवर्जय|	still with our heroes fight and win the light of heaven.
अरं कषयाय नो महे विश्वा रूपाण्याविशन|	already have all forms of him entered our spacious dwellingplace.
इन्द्रं जैत्राय हर्षया शचीपतिम|	for victory stir thou indra up the lord of might.
आ नो विश्वाभिरूतिभिरश्विना गछतं युवम|	with all the succours that are yours o aśvins hither come to us.
दस्रा हिरण्यवर्तनी पिबतं सोम्यं मधु|	wonderful borne on paths of gold drink ye the meath with soma juice.
आ नूनं यातमश्विना रथेन सूर्यत्वचा|	come now ye aśvins on your car decked with a sunbright canopy.
भुजी हिरण्यपेशसा कवी गम्भीरचेतसा|	bountiful with your golden forms sages with depth of intellect.
आ यातं नहुषस पर्यान्तरिक्षात सुव्र्क्तिभिः|	come hither from the nahusas come drawn by pure hymns from midair.
पिबाथोश्विना मधु कण्वानां सवने सुतम|	o aśvins drink the savoury juice shed in the kaṇvas sacrifice.
आ नो यातं दिवस पर्यान्तरिक्षादधप्रिया|	come to us hither from the heavens come from midair wellloved by us.
पुत्रः कण्वस्य वामिह सुषाव सोम्यं मधु|	here kaṇvas son hath pressed for you the pleasant meath of soma juice.
आ नो यातमुपश्रुत्यश्विना सोमपीतये|	come aśvins to give car to us to drink the soma aśvins come.
सवाहा सतोमस्य वर्धना पर कवी धीतिभिर्नरा|	hail strengtheners of the praisesong speed onward ye heroes with your thoughts.
यच्चिद धि वां पुर रषयो जुहूरेअवसे नरा|	as heroes in the olden time the Ṛṣis called you to their aid.
आ यातमश्विना गतमुपेमां सुष्टुतिं मम|	so now o aśvins come to us come near to this mine eulogy.
दिवश्चिद रोचनादध्या नो गन्तं सवर्विदा|	even from the luminous sphere of heaven come to us ye who find the light.
धीभिर्वत्सप्रचेतसा सतोमेभिर्हवनश्रुता|	carers for vatsa through our prayers and lauds o yewho hearour call.
किमन्ये पर्यासतेअस्मत सतोमेभिरश्विना|	do others more than we adore the aśvins with their hymns of praise.
पुत्रः कण्वस्य वां रषिर्गीर्भिर्वत्सो अवीव्र्धत|	the Ṛṣi vatsa kaṇvas son hath magnified you with his songs.
आ वां विप्र इहावसेअह्वत सतोमेभिरश्विना|	the holy singer with his hymns hath called you aśvins hitherward.
अरिप्रा वर्त्रहन्तमा ता नो भूतं मयोभुवा|	best vṛtraslayers free from stain as such bring us felicity.
आ यद वां योषणा रथमतिष्ठद वाजिनीवसू|	what time ye lords of ample wealth the lady mounted on your car.
विश्वान्यश्विना युवं पर धीतान्यगछतम|	then o ye aśvins ye attained all wishes that your hearts desired.
अतः सहस्रनिर्णिजा रथेना यातमश्विना|	come thence o aśvins on your car that hath a thousand ornaments.
वत्सो वां मधुमद वचोअशंसीत काव्यः कविः|	vatsa the sage the sages son hath sung a song of sweets to you.
पुरुमन्द्रा पुरूवसू मनोतरा रयीणाम|	cheerers of many rich in goods discoverers of opulence.
सतोमं मे अश्विनाविममभि वह्नी अनूषाताम|	the aśvins riders through the sky have welcomed this my song of praise.
आ नो विश्वान्यश्विना धत्तं राधांस्यह्रया|	o aśvins grant us all rich gifts wherewith no man mav interfere.
कर्तं न रत्वियावतो मा नो रीरधतं निदे|	make us observe the stated times give us not over to reproach.
यन नास्त्या परावति यद वा सथो अध्यम्बरे|	whether nāsatyas ye be nigh or whether ye be far away.
अतः सहस्रनिर्णिजा रथेना यातमश्विना|	come thence o aśvins on your car that hath a thousand ornaments.
यो वां नासत्याव रषिर्गीर्भिर्वत्सो अवीव्र्धत|	vatsa the Ṛṣi with his songs nāsatyas hath exalted you.
तस्मै सहस्रनिर्णिजमिषं धत्तं घर्तश्चुतम|	grant him rich food distilling oil graced with a thousand ornaments.
परास्मा ऊर्जं घर्तश्चुतमश्विना यछतं युवम|	bestow on him o aśvins food that strengthens and that drops with oil.
यो वां सुम्नाय तुष्टवद वसूयाद दानुनस पती|	on him who praises you for bliss and lords of bounty prays for wealth.
आ नो गन्तं रिशादसेमं सतोमं पुरुभुजा|	come to us ye who slay the foe lords of rich treasure to this hymn.
कर्तं नः सुश्रियो नरेमा दातमभिष्टये|	o heroes give us high renown and these good things of earth for help.
आ वां विश्वाभिरूतिभिः परियमेधा अहूषत|	the priyamedhas have invoked you with all succours that are yours.
राजन्तावध्वराणामश्विना यामहूतिषु|	you aśvins lords of solemn rites with calls entreating you to come.
आ नो गन्तं मयोभुवाश्विना शम्भुवा युवम|	come to us aśvins ye who bring felicity auspicious ones.
यो वां विपन्यू धीतिभिर्गीर्भिर्वत्सो अवीव्र्धत|	to vatsa who with prayer and hymn lovers of song hath honoured you.
याभिः कण्वं मेधातिथिं याभिर्वशं दशव्रजम|	aid us o heroes for those hymns for which ye helped gosarya erst.
याभिर्गोशर्यमावतं ताभिर्नोअवतं नरा|	gave vaśa dasavraja aid and kaṇva and medhatithi.
याभिर्नरा तरसदस्युमावतं कर्त्व्ये धने|	and favoured trasadasyu ye heroes in spoildeciding fray.
ताभिः षवस्मानश्विना परावतं वाजसातये|	for these o aśvins graciously assist us in acquiring strength.
पर वां सतोमाः सुव्र्क्तयो गिरो वर्धन्त्वश्विना|	o aśvins may pure hymns of ours and songs and praises honour you.
पुरुत्रा वर्त्रहन्तमा ता नो भूतं पुरुस्प्र्हा|	best slayers everywhere of foes as such we fondly yearn for you.
तरीणि पदान्यश्विनोराविः सान्ति गुहा परः|	three places of the aśvins erst concealed are made apparent now.
कवी रतस्य पत्मभिरर्वाग जीवेभ्यस परि|	both sages with the flight of law come hither unto those who live.
पिबा सुतस्य रसिनो मत्स्वा न इन्द्र गोमतः|	drink indra of the savoury juice and cheer thee with our milky draught.
आपिर्नो बोधिसधमाद्यो वर्धेअस्मानवन्तु ते धियः|	be for our weal our friend and sharer of the feast and let thy wisdom guard us well.
भूयाम ते सुमतौ वाजिनो वयं मा न सतरभिमातये|	in thy kind grace and favour may we still be strong expose us not to foes attack.
अस्माञ्चित्राभिरवतादभिष्टिभिरा नः सुम्नेषु यामय|	with manifold assistance guard and succour us and bring us to felicity.
इमा उ तवा पुरूवसो गिरो वर्धन्तु या मम|	may these my songs of praise exalt thee lord who hast abundant wealth.
पावकवर्णाःशुचयो विपश्चितोअभि सतोमैरनूषत|	men skilled in holy hymns pure with the hues of fire have sung them with their lauds to thee.
अयं सहस्रं रषिभिः सहस्क्र्तः समुद्र इव पप्रथे|	he with his might enhanced by Ṛṣis thousandfold hath like an ocean spread himself.
सत्यः सो अस्य महिमा गर्णे शवो यज्ञेषु विप्रराज्ये|	his majesty is praised as true at solemn rites his power where holy singers rule.
इन्द्रमिद देवतातय इन्द्रं परयत्यध्वरे|	indra for worship of the gods indra while sacrifice proceeds.
इन्द्रं समीकेवनिनो हवामह इन्द्रं धनस्य सातये|	indra as worshippers in battleshock we call indra that we may win the spoil.
इन्द्रो मह्ना रोदसी पप्रथच्छव इन्द्रः सूर्यमरोचयत|	with might hath indra spread out heaven and earth with power hath indra lighted up the sun.
इन्द्रे ह विश्वा भुवनानि येमिर इन्द्रे सुवानास इन्दवः|	in indra are all creatures closely held in him meet the distilling somadrops.
अभि तवा पूर्वपीतय इन्द्र सतोमेभिरायवः|	men with their lauds are urging thee indra to drink the soma first.
समीचीनासर्भवः समस्वरन रुद्रा गर्नन्त पूर्व्यम|	the Ṛbhus in accord have lifted up their voice and rudras sung thee as the first.
अस्येदिन्द्रो वाव्र्धे वर्ष्ण्यं शवो मदे सुतस्य विष्णवि|	indra increased his manly strength at sacrifice in the wild rapture of this juice.
अद्या तमस्य महिमानमायवोअनु षटुवन्ति पूर्वथा|	and living men today even as of old sing forth their praises to his majesty.
तत तवा यामि सुवीर्यं तद बरह्म पूर्वचित्तये|	i crave of thee that hero strength that thou mayst first regard this prayer.
येना यतिभ्यो भर्गवे धने हिते येन परस्कण्वमाविथ|	wherewith thou holpest bhṛgu and the yatis and praskaṇva when the prize was staked.
येना समुद्रमस्र्जो महीरपस्तदिन्द्र वर्ष्णि ते शवः|	wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea that indra is thy manly strength.
सद्यः सो अस्य महिमा न संनशे यं कषोणीरनुचक्रदे|	for ever unattainable is this power of him to whom the worlds have cried aloud.
शग्धी न इन्द्र यत तवा रयिं यामि सुवीर्यम|	help us o indra when we pray to thee for wealth and hero might.
शग्धि वाजाय परथमं सिषासते शग्धि सतोमाय पूर्व्य|	first help thou on to strength the man who strives to win and aid our laud o ancient one.
शग्धी नो अस्य यद ध पौरमाविथ धिय इन्द्र सिषासतः|	help for us indra as thou holpest paura once this mans devotions bent on gain.
शग्धि यथा रुशमं शयावकं कर्पमिन्द्र परावः सवर्णरम|	help as thou gavest ruśama and Śyāvaka and svarṇara and kṛpa aid.
कन नव्यो अतसीनां तुरो गर्णीत मर्त्यः|	what newest of imploring prayers shall then the zealous mortal sing.
नही नवस्य महिमानमिन्द्रियं सवर्ग्र्णन्त आनशुः|	for have not they who laud his might and indrapower won for themselves the light of heaven.
कदु सतुवन्त रतयन्त देवत रषिः को विप्र ओहते|	when shall they keep the law and praise thee mid the gods who counts as Ṛṣi and as sage.
कदा हवं मघवन्निन्द्र सुन्वतः कदु सतुवत आ गमः|	when ever wilt thou indra maghavan come nigh to pressers or to praisers call.
उदु तये मधुमत्तमा गिर सतोमास ईरते|	these songs of ours exceeding sweet these hymns of praise ascend to thee.
सत्राजितो धनसा अक्षितोतयो वाजयन्तो रथा इव|	like everconquering chariots that display their strength gain wealth and give unfailing aid.
कण्वा इव भर्गवः सूर्या इव विश्वमिद धीतमानशुः|	the bhṛgus are like suns like kaṇvas and have gained all that their thoughts were bent upon.
इन्द्रं सतोमेभिर्महयन्त आयवः परियमेधासो अस्वरन|	the living men of priyamedhas race have sung exalting indra with their lauds.
युक्ष्वा हि वर्त्रहन्तम हरी इन्द्र परावतः|	best slayer of the vṛtras yoke thy bay steeds indra from afar.
अर्वाचीनो मघवन सोमपीतय उग्र रष्वेभिरा गहि|	come with the high ones hither maghavan to us mighty to drink the soma juice.
इमे हि ते कारवो वावशुर्धिया विप्रासो मेधसातये|	for these the bards and singers have cried out to thee with prayer to gain the sacrifice.
सत्वं नो मघवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणो वेनो न शर्णुधी हवम|	as such o maghavan indra who lovest song even as a lover bear my call.
निरिन्द्र बर्हतीभ्यो वर्त्रं धनुभ्यो अस्फुरः|	thou from the lofty plains above o indra hurledst vṛtra down.
निरर्बुदस्य मर्गयस्य मायिनो निः पर्वतस्य गा आजः|	thou dravest forth the kine of guileful mṛgaya and arbuda from the mountains hold.
निरग्नयो रुरुचुर्निरु सूर्यो निः सोम इन्द्रियो रसः|	bright were the flaming fires the sun gave forth his shine and soma indras juice shone clear.
निरन्तरिक्षादधमो महामहिं कर्षे तदिन्द्र पौंस्यम|	indra thou blewest the great dragon from the air men must regard that valorous deed.
यं मे दुरिन्द्रो मरुतः पाकस्थामा कौरयाणः|	the fairest courser of them all who runneth on as twere to heaven.
विश्वेषां तमना शोभिष्ठमुपेव दिवि धावमानम|	which indra and the maruts gave and pākasthāman kaurayāṇ.
रोहितं मे पाकस्थामा सुधुरं कक्ष्यप्राम|	to me hath pākasthāman given a ruddy horse good at the pole.
अदाद रायो विबोधनम|	filling is girth and rousing wealth.
यस्मा अन्ये दश परति धुरं वहन्ति वह्नयः|	compared with whom no other ten strong coursers harnessed to the pole.
अस्तं वयो न तुग्र्यम|	bear tugrya to his dwelling place.
आत्मा पितुस्तनूर्वास ओजोदा अभ्यञ्जनम|	raiment is body food is life and healing ointment giveth strength.
तुरीयमिद रोहितस्य पाकस्थामानं भोजं दातारमब्रवम|	as the freehanded giver of the ruddy steed i have named pākasthāman fourth.
इदं वसो सुतमन्धः पिबा सुपूर्णमुदरम|	here is the soma juice expressed o vasu drink till thou art full.
अनाभयिन ररिमा ते|	undaunted god we give it thee.
नर्भिर्धूतः सुतो अश्नैरव्यो वारैः परिपूतः|	washed by the men pressed out with stones strained through the filter made of wool.
अश्वोन निक्तो नदीषु|	tis like a courser bathed in stream.
तं ते यवं यथा गोभिः सवादुमकर्म शरीणन्तः|	this juice have we made sweet for thee like barley blending it with milk.
इन्द्र तवास्मिन सधमादे|	indra i call thee to our feast.
इन्द्र इत सोमपा एक इन्द्रः सुतपा विश्वायुः|	beloved of all indra alone drinks up the flowing soma juice.
अन्तर्देवान मर्त्यांश्च|	among the gods and mortal men.
न यं शुक्रो न दुराशीर्न तर्प्रा उरुव्यचसम|	the friend whom not the brillianthued the badlymixt or bitter draught.
अपस्प्र्ण्वते सुहार्दम|	repels the farextending god.
गोभिर्यदीमन्ये अस्मन मर्गं न वरा मर्गयन्ते|	while other men than we with milk chase him as hunters chase a deer.
अभित्सरन्ति धेनुभिः|	and with their kine inveigle him.
तरय इन्द्रस्य सोमाः सुतासः सन्तु देवस्य|	for him for indra for the god be pressed three draughts of soma juice.
सवे कषये सुतपाव्नः|	in the juicedrinkers own abode.
तरयः कोशासः शचोतन्ति तिस्रश्चम्वः सुपूर्णाः|	three reservoirs exude their drops filled are three beakers to the brim.
समाने अधि भार्मन|	all for one offering to the god.
शुचिरसि पुरुनिष्ठाः कषीरैर्मध्यत आशीर्तः|	pure art thou set in many a place and blended in the midst with milk.
दध्ना मन्दिष्ठः शूरस्य|	and curd to cheer the hero best.
इमे त इन्द्र सोमास्तीव्रा अस्मे सुतासः|	here indra are thy somadraughts pressed out by us the strong the pure.
शुक्रा आशिरंयाचन्ते|	they crave admixture of the milk.
तानाशिरं पुरोळाशमिन्द्रेमं सोमं शरीणीहि|	o indra pour in milk prepare the cake and mix the somadraught.
रेवन्तं हि तवा शर्णोमि|	i hear them say that thou art rich.
हर्त्सु पीतासो युध्यन्ते दुर्मदासो न सुरायाम|	quaffed juices fight within the breast the drunken praise not by their wine.
ऊधर्न नग्ना जरन्ते|	the naked praise not when it rains.
रेवानिद रेवत सतोता सयात तवावतो मघोनः|	rich be the praiser of one rich munificent and famed like thee.
परेदु हरिवः शरुतस्य|	high rank be his o lord of bays.
उक्थं चन शस्यमानमगोररिरा चिकेत|	foe of the man who adds no milk he heeds not any chanted hymn.
न गायत्रंगीयमानम|	or holy psalm that may he sung.
मा न इन्द्र पीयत्नवे मा शर्धते परा दाः|	give us not indra as a prey unto the scornful or the proud.
शिक्षा शचीवः शचीभिः|	help mighty one with power and might.
वयमु तवा तदिदर्था इन्द्र तवायन्तः सखायः|	this even this o indra we implore as thy devoted friends.
कण्वाुक्थेभिर्जरन्ते|	the kaṇvas praise thee with their hymns.
न घेमन्यदा पपन वज्रिन्नपसो नविष्टौ|	naught else o thunderer have i praised in the skilled singers eulogy.
तवेदु सतोमं चिकेत|	on thy land only have i thought.
इछन्ति देवाः सुन्वन्तं न सवप्नाय सप्र्हयन्ति|	the gods seek him who presses out the soma they desire not sleep.
यन्ति परमादमतन्द्राः|	they punish sloth unweariedly.
ओ षु पर याहि वाजेभिर्मा हर्णीथा अभ्यस्मान|	come hither swift with gifts of wealth  be not thou angry with uslike.
महानिव युवजानिः|	a great man with a youthful bride.
मो षवद्य दुर्हणावान सायं करदारे अस्मत|	let him not wrathful with us spend the evening far from us today.
अश्रीर इव जामाता|	like some unpleasant soninlaw.
विद्मा हयस्य वीरस्य भूरिदावरीं सुमतिम|	for well we know this heros love most liberal of the boons he gives.
तरिषु जातस्य मनांसि|	his plans whom the three worlds display.
आ तू षिञ्च कण्वमन्तं न घा विद्म शवसानात|	pour forth the gift which kaṇvas bring for none more glorious do we know.
यशस्तरं शतमूतेः|	than the strong lord with countless aids.
जयेष्ठेन सोतरिन्द्राय सोमं वीराय शक्राय|	o presser offer soma first to indra hero Śakra him.
भरा पिबन नर्याय|	the friend of man that he may drink.
यो वेदिष्ठो अव्यथिष्वश्वावन्तं जरित्र्भ्यः|	who in untroubled ways is best provider for his worshippers.
वाजं सतोत्र्भ्यो गोमन्तम|	of strength in horses and in kine.
पन्यमपन्यमित सोतार आ धावत मद्याय|	pressers for him blend soma juice each draught most excellent for him.
सोमं वीरय शूरय|	the brave the hero for his joy.
पाता वर्त्रहा सुतमा घा गमन नारे अस्मत|	the vṛtraslayer drinks the juice may he who gives a hundred aids.
नि यमते शतमूतिः|	approach nor stay afar from us.
एह हरी बरह्मयुजा शग्मा वक्षतः सखायम|	may the strong bay steeds yoked by prayer bring hither unto us our friend.
गीर्भिःश्रुतं गिर्वणसम|	lover of song renowned by songs.
सवादवः सोमा आ याहि शरीताः सोमा आ याहि|	sweet are the soma juices come blent are the soma juices come.
शिप्रिन्न्र्षीवः शचीवो नायमछा सधमादम|	Ṛṣilike mighty fair of cheek come hither quickly to the feast.
सतुतश्च यास्त्वा वर्धन्ति महे राधसे नर्म्णाय|	and lauds which strengthen thee for great bounty and valour and exalt.
इन्द्रकारिणं वर्धन्तः|	indra who doeth glorious deeds.
गिरश्च यास्ते गिर्वाह उक्था च तुभ्यं तानि|	and songs to thee who lovest song and all those hymns addressed to thee.
सत्रा दधिरे शवांसि|	these evermore confirm thy might.
एवेदेष तुविकूर्मिर्वाजानेको वज्रहस्तः|	thus he sole doer of great deeds whose hand holds thunder gives us strength.
सनदम्र्क्तोदयते|	he who hath never been subdued.
हन्त वर्त्रं दक्षिणेनेन्द्रः पुरु पुरुहूतः|	vṛtra he slays with his right hand even indra great with mighty power.
महान महीभिः शचिभिः|	and muchinvoked in many a place.
यस्मिन विश्वाश्चर्षणय उत चयौत्ना जरयांसि च|	he upon whom all men depend all regions all achievements he.
अनु घेन मन्दी मघोनः|	takes pleasure in our wealthy chiefs.
एष एतानि चकारेन्द्रो विश्वा योअति शर्ण्वे|	all this hath he accomplished yea indra most gloriously renowned.
वाजदावा मघोनाम|	who gives our wealthy princes strength.
परभर्ता रथं गव्यन्तमपाकच्चिद यमवति|	who drives his chariot seeking spoil from afar to him he loves.
इनो वसुस हि वोळ्हा|	for swift is he to bring men wealth.
सनिता विप्रो अर्वद्भिर्हन्ता वर्त्रं नर्भिः शूरः|	the sage who winning spoil with steeds slays vṛtra hero with the men.
सत्योअविता विधन्तम|	his servants faithful succourer.
यजध्वैनं परियमेधा इन्द्रं सत्राचा मनसा|	o priyamedhas worship with collected mind this indra whom.
यो भूत सोमैः सत्यमद्वा|	the soma hath full well inspired.
गाथश्रवसं सत्पतिं शरवस्कामं पुरुत्मानम|	ye kaṇvas sing the mighty one lord of the brave who loves renown.
कण्वासोगात वाजिनम|	allpresent glorified by song.
य रते चिद गास पदेभ्यो दात सखा नर्भ्यः शचीवान|	strong friend who with no trace of feet restores the cattle to the men.
येस्मिन काममश्रियन|	who rest their wish and hope on him.
इत्था धीवन्तमद्रिवः काण्वं मेध्यातिथिम|	shaped as a ram stonehurler i once thou camest hither to the son.
मेषो भूतोऽभि यन्नयः|	of kaṇva wise medhyātithi.
शिक्षा विभिन्दो अस्मै चत्वार्ययुता ददत|	vibhindu thou hast helped this man giving him thousands four times ten.
अष्टा परः सहस्रा|	and afterward eight thousand more.
उत सु तये पयोव्र्धा माकी रणस्य नप्त्या|	and these twain pouring streams of milk creative daughters of delight.
जनित्वनाय मामहे|	for wedlock sake i glorify.
तं गूर्धया सवर्णरं देवासो देवमरतिं दधन्विरे|	sing praise to hiin the lord of light the gods have made the god to be their messenger.
देवत्रा हव्यमोहिरे|	and sent oblation to gods.
विभूतरातिं विप्र चित्रशोचिषमग्निमीळिष्व यन्तुरम|	agni the bounteous giver bright with varied flames laud thou o singer sobhari.
अस्य मेधस्य सोम्यस्य सोभरे परेमध्वराय पूर्व्यम|	him who controls this sacred food with soma blent who hath first claim to sacrifice.
यजिष्ठं तवा वव्र्महे देवं देवत्रा होतारममर्त्यम|	thee have we chosen skilftillest in sacrifice immortal priest among the gods.
अस्य यज्ञस्य सुक्रतुम|	wise finisher of this holy rite.
ऊर्जो नपातं सुभगं सुदीदितिमग्निं शरेष्ठशोचिषम|	the son of strength the blessed brightly shining one agni whose light is excellent.
स नो मित्रस्य वरुणस्य सो अपामा सुम्नं यक्षते दिवि|	may be by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of mitra varuṇa and the floods.
यः समिधा य आहुती यो वेदेन ददाश मर्तो अग्नये|	the mortal who hath ministered to agni with oblation fuel ritual lore.
यो नमसा सवध्वरः|	and reverence skilled in sacrifice.
तस्येदर्वन्तो रंहयन्त आशवस्तस्य दयुम्नितमं यशः|	verily swift to run are his fleetfooted steeds and most resplendent fame is his.
न तमंहो देवक्र्तं कुतश्चन न मर्त्यक्र्तं नशत|	no trouble caused by gods or wrought by mortal man from any side oertaketh him.
सवग्नयो वो अग्निभिः सयाम सूनो सहस ऊर्जां पते|	may we by thine own fires be well supplied with fire o son of strength o lord of might.
सुवीरस्त्वमस्मयुः|	thou as our friend hast worthy men.
परशंसमानो अतिथिर्न मित्रियोअग्नी रथो न वेद्यः|	agni who praises like a guest of friendly mind is as a car that brings us gear.
तवे कषेमासो अपि सन्ति साधवस्त्वं राजा रयीणाम|	also in thee is found perfect security thou art the sovran lord of wealth.
सो अद्धा दाश्वध्वरोअग्ने मर्तः सुभग स परशंस्यः|	that man moreover merits praise who brings auspicious agni sacrificial gifts.
स धीभिरस्तु सनिता|	may he win riches by his thoughts.
यस्य तवमूर्ध्वो अध्वराय तिष्ठसि कषयद्वीरः स साधते|	he for whose sacrifice thou standest up erect is prosperous and rules oer men.
सो अर्वद्भिः सनिता स विपन्युभिः स शूरैः सनिता कर्तम|	he wins with coursers and with singers killed in song with heroes he obtains the prize.
यस्याग्निर्वपुर्ग्र्हे सतोमं चनो दधीत विश्ववार्यः|	he in whose dwelling agni is chief ornament and alldesired loves his laud well.
हव्या वा वेविषद विषः|	and zealously tends his offerings.
विप्रस्य वा सतुवतः सहसो यहो मक्षूतमस्य रातिषु|	his or the lauding sages word his son of strength who is most prompt with sacred gifts.
अवोदेवमुपरिमर्त्यं कर्धि वसो विविदुषो वचः|	set thou beneath the gods vasu above mankind the speech of the intelligent.
यो अग्निं हव्यदातिभिर्नमोभिर्वा सुदक्षमाविवासति|	he who with sacrificial gifts or homage bringeth very skilful agni nigh.
गिरा वाजिरशोचिषम|	or him who flashes fast with song.
समिधा यो निशिती दाशददितिं धामभिरस्य मर्त्यः|	the mortal who with blazing fuel as his laws command adores the perfect god.
विश्वेत स धीभिः सुभगो जनानति दयुम्नैरुद्न इव तारिषत|	blest with his thoughts in splendour shall exceed all men as though he overpassed the floods.
तदग्ने दयुम्नमा भर यत सासहत सदने कं चिदत्रिणम|	give us the splendour agni which may overcome each greedy fiend in our abode.
मन्युं जनस्य दूढ्यः|	the wrath of evilhearted folk.
येन चष्टे वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा येन नासत्या भगः|	that wherewith mitra varuṇa and aryaman the aśvins bhaga give us light.
वयं तत ते शवसा गातुवित्तमा इन्द्रत्वोता विधेमहि|	that may we by thy power finding best furtherance worship o indra helped by thee.
ते घेदग्ने सवाध्यो ये तवा विप्र निदधिरे नर्चक्षसम|	o agni most devout are they the sages who have set thee sage exceeding wise.
विप्रासो देव सुक्रतुम|	o god for men to look upon.
त इद वेदिं सुभग त आहुतिं ते सोतुं चक्रिरे दिवि|	who have arranged thine altar blessed god at morn brought thine oblation pressed the juice.
तैद वाजेभिर्जिग्युर्महद धनं ये तवे कामं नयेरिरे|	they by their deeds of strength have won diem mighty wealth who have set all their hope in thee.
भद्रो नो अग्निराहुतो भद्रा रातिः सुभग भद्रो अध्वरः|	may agni worshipped bring us bliss may the gift blessed one and sacrifice bring bliss.
भद्रा उत परशस्तयः|	yea may our praises bring us bliss.
भद्रं मनः कर्णुष्व वर्त्रतूर्ये येना समत्सु सासहः|	show forth the mind that brings success in war with fiends wherewith thou conquerest in fight.
अव सथिरा तनुहि भूरि शर्धतां वनेमा ते अभिष्टिभिः|	bring down the many firm hopes of our enemies and let us vanquish with thine aid.
ईळे गिरा मनुर्हितं यं देवा दूतमरतिं नयेरिरे|	i praise with song the friend of man whom gods sent down to be herald and messenger.
यजिष्ठं हव्यवाहनम|	best worshipper bearer of our gifts.
तिग्मजम्भाय तरुणाय राजते परयो गायस्यग्नये|	thou unto sharptoothed agni young and radiant god proclaimest with thy song the feast.
यः पिंशते सून्र्ताभिः सुवीर्यमग्निर्घ्र्तेभिराहुतः|	agni who for our sweet strains moulds heroic strength when sacred oil is offered him.
यदी घर्तेभिराहुतो वाशीमग्निर्भरत उच्चाव च|	while served with sacrificial oil now upward and now downward agni moves his sword.
असुर इव निर्णिजम|	as doth the asura his robe.
यो हव्यान्यैरयता मनुर्हितो देव आसा सुगन्धिना|	the god the friend of man who bears our gifts to heaven the god with his sweetsmelling mouth.
विवासते वार्याणि सवध्वरो होता देवो अमर्त्यः|	distributes skilled in sacrifice his precious things invoking priest immortal god.
यदग्ने मर्त्यस्त्वं सयामहं मित्रमहो अमर्त्यः|	son of strength agni if thou wert the mortal bright as mitra i worshipped with our gifts.
सहसः सूनवाहुत|	and i were the immortal god.
न तवा रासीयाभिशस्तये वसो न पापत्वाय सन्त्य|	i would not give thee up vasu to calumny or misery o bounteous one.
न मे सतोतामतीवा न दुर्हितः सयादग्ने न पापया|	my worshipper should feel no hunger or distress nor agni should he live in sin.
पितुर्न पुत्रः सुभ्र्तो दुरोण आ देवानेतु पर णो हविः|	like a son cherished in his fathers houi§e let our oblation rise unto the gods.
तवाहमग्न ऊतिभिर्नेदिष्ठाभिः सचेय जोषमा वसो|	with thine immediate aid may i excellent agni ever gain my wish.
सदा देवस्य मर्त्यः|	a mortal with a god to help.
तव करत्वा सनेयं तव रातिभिरग्ने तव परशस्तिभिः|	o agni by thy wisdom by thy bounties by thy leading may i gather wealth.
तवामिदाहुः परमतिं वसो ममाग्ने हर्षस्व दातवे|	excellent agni thou art called my providence delight thou to be liberal.
पर सो अग्ने तवोतिभिः सुवीराभिस्तिरते वाजभर्मभिः|	agni he conquers by thine aid that brings him store of noble heroes and great strength.
यस्य तवं सख्यमावरः|	whose bond of friendship is thy choice.
तव दरप्सो नीलवान वाश रत्विय इन्धानः सिष्णवा ददे|	thy spark is black and crackling kindled in due time o bounteous it is taken up.
तवं महीनामुषसामसि परियः कषपो वस्तुषु राजसि|	thou art the dear friend of the mighty mornings thou shinest in glimmerings of the night.
तमागन्म सोभरयः सहस्रमुष्कं सवभिष्टिमवसे|	we sobharis have come to him for succour who is good to help with thousand powers.
सम्राजं तरासदस्यवम|	the sovran trasadasyus friend.
यस्य ते अग्ने अन्ये अग्नय उपक्षितो वया इव|	o agni thou on whom all other fires depend as branches on the parent stem.
विपो न दयुम्ना नि युवे जनानां तव कषत्राणि वर्धयन|	i make the treasures of the folk like songs mine own while i exalt thy sovran might.
यमादित्यासो अद्रुहः पारं नयथ मर्त्यम|	the mortal whom Ādityas ye guilelew lead to the farther bank.
मघोनां विश्वेषां सुदानवः|	of all the princes bounteous ones.
यूयं राजानः कं चिच्चर्षणीसहः कषयन्तं मानुषाननु|	whoeer he be manruling kings the regent of the race of men.
वयं ते वो वरुण मित्रार्यमन सयामेद रतस्य रथ्यः|	may we o mitra varuṇa and aryaman like him be furtherers of your law.
अदान मे पौरुकुत्स्यः पञ्चाशतं तरसदस्युर्वधूनाम|	a gift of fifty female slaves hath trasadasyu given me purukutsas son.
मंहिष्ठो अर्यः सत्पतिः|	most liberal kind lord of the brave.
उत मे परयियोर्वयियोः सुवास्त्वा अधि तुग्वनि|	and Śyāva too for me led forth a strong steed at suvastus ford.
तिसॄणांसप्ततीनां शयावः परणेता भुवद वसुर्दियानां पतिः|	a herd of three times seventy kine good lord of gifts he gave to me.
इमे विप्रस्य वेधसोअग्नेरस्त्र्तयज्वनः|	these songs of mine go forth as lauds of agni the disposing sage.
गिरः सतोमास ईरते|	whose worshipper is neer oerthrown.
अस्मै ते परतिहर्यते जातवेदो विचर्षणे|	wise agni jātavedas i beget a song of praise for thee.
अग्ने जनामि सुष्टुतिम|	who willingly receivest it.
आरोका इव घेदह तिग्मा अग्ने तव तविषः|	thy sharpened flames o agni like the gleams of light that glitter through.
दद्भिर्वनानि बप्सति|	devour the forests with their teeth.
हरयो धूमकेतवो वातजूता उप दयवि|	goldcoloured bannered with the smoke urged by the wind aloft to heaven.
यतन्ते वर्थगग्नयः|	rise lightly borne the flames of fire.
एते तये वर्थगग्नय इद्धासः समद्र्क्षत|	these lightly kindled fiery flames are all around made visible.
उषसामिव केतवः|	even as the gleanings of the dawns.
कर्ष्णा रजांसि पत्सुतः परयाणे जातवेदसः|	as jātavedas speeds along the dust is black beneath his feet.
अग्निर्यद रोधति कषमि|	when agni spreads upon the earth.
धासिं कर्ण्वान ओषधीर्बप्सदग्निर्न वायति|	making the plants his nourishment agni devours and wearies not.
पुनर्यन तरुणीरपि|	seeking the tender shrubs again.
जिह्वाभिरह नन्नमदर्चिषा जञ्जणाभवन|	bending him down with all his tongues he flickers with his fiery glow.
अग्निर्वनेषु रोचते|	splendid is agni in the woods.
अप्स्वग्ने सधिष टव सौशधीरनु रुध्यसे|	agni thine home is in the floods into the plants thou forcest way.
गर्भे सञ्जायसे पुनः|	and as their child art born anew.
उदग्ने तव तद घर्तादर्ची रोचत आहुतम|	worshipped with offerings shines thy flame o agni from the sacred oil.
निंसानं जुह्वो मुखे|	with kisses on the ladles mouth.
उक्षान्नाय वशान्नाय सोमप्र्ष्ठाय वेधसे|	let us serve agni with our hymns disposer fed on ox and cow.
सतोमैर्विधेमाग्नये|	who bears the soma on his back.
उत तवा नमसा वयं होतर्वरेण्यक्रतो|	yea thee o agni do we seek with homage and with fuel priest.
अग्ने समिद्भिरीमहे|	whose wisdom is most excellent.
उत तवा भर्गुवच्छुचे मनुष्वदग्न आहुत|	o worshipped with oblations pure agni we call on thee as erst.
अङगिरस्वद धवामहे|	did bhṛgu manus aṅgiras.
तवं हयग्ने अग्निना विप्रो विप्रेण सन सता|	for thou o agni by the fire sage by the sage good by the good.
सखा सख्या समिध्यसे|	friend by the friend art lighted up.
स तवं विप्राय दाशुषे रयिं देहि सहस्रिणम|	so wealth in thousands food with store of heroes give thou to the sage.
अग्ने वीरवतीमिषम|	o agni to the worshipper.
अग्ने भरातः सहस्क्र्त रोहिदश्व शुचिव्रत|	o agni brother made by strength lord of red steeds and brilliant sway.
इमं सतोमंजुषस्व मे|	take pleasure in this laud of mine.
उत तवाग्ने मम सतुतो वाश्राय परतिहर्यते|	my praises agni go to thee as the cows seek the stall to meet.
गोष्ठं गाव इवाशत|	the lowing calf that longs for milk.
तुभ्यं ता अङगिरस्तम विश्वाः सुक्षितयः पर्थक|	agni best aṅgiras to thee all people who have pleasant homes.
अग्ने कामाय येमिरे|	apart have turned as to their wish.
अग्निं धीभिर्मनीषिणो मेधिरासो विपश्चितः|	the sages skilled in holy song and thinkers with their thoughts have urged.
अद्मसद्याय हिन्विरे|	agni to share the sacred feast.
तं तवामज्मेषु वाजिनं तन्वाना अग्ने अध्वरम|	so agni unto thee the priest invoker strong in forays pray.
वह्निंहोतारमीळते|	those who spin out the sacrifice.
पुरुत्रा हि सद्रंं असि विशो विश्वा अनु परभुः|	in many a place the same in look art thou a prince oer all the tribes.
समत्सुत्वा हवामहे|	in battles we invoke thine aid.
तमीळिष्व य आहुतोअग्निर्विभ्राजते घर्तैः|	pray thou to agni pray to him who blazes served with sacred oil.
इमं नःश्र्णवद धवम|	let him give ear to this our call.
तं तवा वयं हवामहे शर्ण्वन्तं जातवेदसम|	we call on thee as such as one who hears as jātavedas one.
अग्ने घनन्तमप दविषः|	agni who beats away our foes.
विशां राजानमद्भुतमध्यक्षं धर्मणामिमम|	i pray to agni king of men the wonderful the president.
अग्निमीळे स उ शरवत|	of holy laws may he give ear.
अग्निं विश्वायुवेपसं मर्यं न वाजिनं हितम|	him like a bridegroom him who stirs all people like a noble horse.
सप्तिं न वाजयामसि|	like a fleet steed we instigate.
घनन मर्ध्राण्यप दविषो दहन रक्षांसि विश्वहा|	slaying things deadly burning up foes rākṣasas on every side.
अग्नेतिग्मेन दीदिहि|	shine agni with thy sharpened flame.
यं तवा जनास इन्धते मनुष्वदङगिरस्तम|	thou whom the people kindle even as manus did best aṅgiras.
अग्ने स बोधिमे वचः|	o agni mark thou this my speech.
यदग्ने दिविजा अस्यप्सुजा वा सहस्क्र्त|	o agni made by strength be thou born in the heavens or born in floods.
तं तवा गीर्भिर्हवामहे|	as such we call on thee with songs.
तुभ्यं घेत ते जना इमे विश्वाः सुक्षितयः पर्थक|	yea all the people all the folk who have good dwellings each apart.
धासिं हिन्वन्त्यत्तवे|	send food for thee to eat thereof.
ते घेदग्ने सवाध्योअहा विश्वा नर्चक्षसः|	o agni so may we devout gazed at by men throughout our days.
तरन्तः सयाम दुर्गहा|	pass lightly over all distress.
अग्निं मन्द्रं पुरुप्रियं शीरं पावकशोचिषम|	we venerate with cheerful hearts the cheerful agni dear to all.
हर्द्भिर्मन्द्रेभिरीमहे|	burning with purifying flame.
स तवमग्ने विभावसुः सर्जन सूर्यो न रश्मिभिः|	so thou o agni rich in light beaming like sūrya with thy rays.
शर्धन तमांसि जिघ्नसे|	boldly demolishest the gloom.
तत ते सहस्व ईमहे दात्रं यन नोपदस्यति|	we pray to thee for this thy gift victor the gift that faileth not.
तवदग्ने वार्यं वसु|	o agni choicest wealth from thee.
यज्ञस्य हि सथ रत्विजा सस्नी वाजेषु कर्मसु|	ye twain are priests of sacrifice winners in war and holy works.
इन्द्राग्नीतस्य बोधतम|	indra and agni mark this well.
तोशासा रथयावाना वर्त्रहणापराजिता|	ye bounteous riders on the car ye vṛtraslayers unsubdued.
इन्द्राग्नी तस्य बोधतम|	indra and agni mark this well.
इदं वां मदिरं मध्वधुक्षन्नद्रिभिर्नरः|	the men with pressingstones have pressed this meath of yours which gives delight.
इन्द्राग्नी तस्य बोधतम|	indra and agni mark this well.
जुषेथां यज्ञमिष्टये सुतं सोमं सधस्तुती|	accept our sacrifice for weal sharers of praise the soma shed.
इन्द्राग्नी आ गतं नरा|	indra and agni heroes come.
इमा जुषेथां सवना येभिर्हव्यान्यूहथुः|	be pleased with these libations which attract you to our sacred gifts.
इन्द्राग्नीा गतं नरा|	indra and agni heroes come.
इमां गायत्रवर्तनिं जुषेथां सुष्टुतिं मम|	accept this eulogy of mine whose model is the gāyatrī.
इन्द्राग्नी आ गतं नरा|	indra and agni heroes come.
परातर्यावभिरा गतं देवेभिर्जेन्यावसू|	come with the earlyfaring gods ye who are lords of genuine wealth.
इन्द्राग्नी सोमपीतये|	indraagni to the somadraught.
शयावाश्वस्य सुन्वतोअत्रीणां शर्णुतं हवम|	hear ye the call of atris hear Śyāvāśva as he sheds the juice.
इन्द्राग्नीसोमपीतये|	indraagni to the somadraught.
एवा वामह्व ऊतये यथाहुवन्त मेधिराः|	thus have i called you to our aid as sages called on you of old.
इन्द्रग्नी सोमपीतये|	indraagni to the soma draught.
आहं सरस्वतीवतोरिन्द्राग्न्योरवो वर्णे|	indras and agnis grace i claim sarasvatīs associates.
याभ्यां गायत्रं रच्यते|	to whom this psalm of praise is sung.
इन्द्रः सुतेषु सोमेषु करतुं पुनीत उक्थ्यम|	indra when soma juices flow makes his mind pure and meet for lauds.
विदे वर्धस्यदक्षसो महान हि षः|	he gains the power that brings success for great is he.
स परथमे वयोमनि देवानां सदने वर्धः|	in heavens first region in the seat of gods is he who brings success.
सुपारः सुश्रवस्तमः समप्सुजित|	most glorious prompt to save who wins the waterfloods.
तमह्वे वाजसातय इन्द्रं भराय शुष्मिणम|	him to win strength have i invoked even indra mighty for the fray.
भवा नःसुम्ने अन्तमः सखा वर्धे|	be thou most near to us for bliss a friend to aid.
इयं त इन्द्र गिर्वणो रातिः कषरति सुन्वतः|	indra song lover here for thee the worshippers libation flows.
मन्दानो अस्य बर्हिषो वि राजसि|	rejoicing in this sacred grass thou shinest forth.
नूनं तदिन्द्र दद्धि नो यत तवा सुन्वन्त ईमहे|	even now o indra give us that which pressing juice we crave of thee.
रयिं नश्चित्रमा भरा सवर्विदम|	bring us wealth manifold which finds the light of heaven.
सतोता यत ते विचर्षणिरतिप्रशर्धयद गिरः|	what time the zealous worshipper hath boldly sung his songs to thee.
वया इवानु रोहते जुषन्त यत|	like branches of a tree upgrows what they desire.
परत्नवज्जनया गिरः शर्णुधी जरितुर्हवम|	generate songs even as of old give car unto the singers call.
मदेमदे ववक्षिथा सुक्र्त्वने|	thou for the pious hast grown great at each carouse.
करीळन्त्यस्य सून्र्ता आपो न परवता यतीः|	sweet strains that glorify him play like waters speeding down a slope.
अया धिया य उच्यते पतिर्दिवः|	yea him who in this song is called the lord of heaven.
उतो पतिर्य उच्यते कर्ष्टीनामेक इद वशी|	yea who alone is called the lord the single ruler of the folk.
नमोव्र्धैरवस्युभिः सुते रण|	by worshippers seeking aid may he joy in the draught.
सतुहि शरुतं विपश्चितं हरी यस्य परसक्षिणा|	praise him the glorious skilled in song lord of the two victorious bays.
गन्तारा दाशुषो गर्हं नमस्विनः|	they seek the worshippers abode who bows in prayer.
तूतुजानो महेमतेअश्वेभिः परुषितप्सुभिः|	put forth thy strength with dappled steeds come thou of mighty intellect.
आ याहि यज्ञमाशुभिः शमिद धि ते|	with swift steeds to the sacrifice for tis thy joy.
इन्द्र शविष्ठ सत्पते रयिं गर्णत्सु धारय|	grant wealth to those who praise thee lord of heroes mightiest indra give.
शरवः सूरिभ्यो अम्र्तं वसुत्वनम|	our princes everlasting fame and opulence.
हवे तवा सूर उदिते हवे मध्यन्दिने दिवः|	i call thee when the sun is risen i call thee at the noon of day.
जुषाण इन्द्र सप्तिभिर्न आ गहि|	with thy carhorses indra come wellpleased to us.
आ तू गहि पर तु दरव मत्स्वा सुतस्य गोमतः|	speed forward hither come to us rejoice thee in the milky draught.
तन्तुं तनुष्व पूर्व्यं यथा विदे|	spin out the thread of ancient time as well is known.
यच्छक्रासि परावति यदर्वावति वर्त्रहन|	if Śakra vṛtraslayer thou be far away or near to us.
यद वा समुद्रे अन्धसोअवितेदसि|	or in the sea thou art the guard of soma juice.
इन्द्रं वर्धन्तु नो गिर इन्द्रं सुतास इन्दवः|	let songs we sing and somadrops expressed by us make indra strong.
इन्द्रे हविष्मतीर्विशो अराणिषुः|	the tribes who bring oblations find delight in him.
तमिद विप्रा अवस्यवः परवत्वतीभिरूतिभिः|	him sages longing for his aid with offerings brought in eager haste.
इन्द्रं कषोणीरवर्धयन वया इव|	him even as branches all mankind have made to grow.
तरिकद्रुकेषु चेतनं देवासो यज्ञमत्नत|	at the trkadrukas the gods span sacrifice that stirred the mind.
तमिद वर्धन्तुनो गिरः सदाव्र्धम|	may our songs strengthen him who still hath strengthened us.
सतोता यत ते अनुव्रत उक्थान्य रतुथा दधे|	when true to duty at due times the worshipper offers lauds to thee.
शुचिः पावक उच्यते सो अद्भुतः|	they call him purifier pure and wonderful.
तदिद रुद्रस्य चेतति यह्वं परत्नेषु धामसु|	that mind of rudra fresh and strong moves conscious in the ancient ways.
मनो यत्रावि तद दधुर्विचेतसः|	with reference whereto the wise have ordered this.
यदि मे सख्यमावर इमस्य पाह्यन्धसः|	if thou elect to be my friend drink of this sacrificial juice.
येन विश्वा अति दविषो अतारिम|	by help whereof we may subdue all enemies.
कदा त इन्द्र गिर्वण सतोता भवाति शन्तमः|	o indra lover of the song when shall thy praiser be most blest.
कदा नो गव्ये अश्व्ये वसौ दधः|	when wilt thou grant us wealth in herds of kine and steeds.
उत ते सुष्टुता हरी वर्षणा वहतो रथम|	and thy two highiylauded bays strong stallions draw thy car who art.
अजुर्यस्य मदिन्तमं यमीमहे|	untouched by age most gladdening car for which we pray.
तमीमहे पुरुष्टुतं यह्वं परत्नाभिरूतिभिः|	with ancient offerings we implore the young and strong whom many praise.
नि बर्हिषि परिये सददध दविता|	he from of old hath sat upon dear sacred grass.
वर्धस्वा सु पुरुष्टुत रषिष्टुताभिरूतिभिः|	wax miglity thou whom many laud for aids which Ṛṣis have extolled.
धुक्षस्वपिप्युषीमिषमवा च नः|	pour down for us abundant food and guard us well.
इन्द्र तवमवितेदसीत्था सतुवतो अद्रिवः|	o indra caster of the stone thou helpest him who praises thee.
रतादियर्मि ते धियं मनोयुजम|	from sacrifice i send to thee a mindyoked hymn.
इह तया सधमाद्य युजानः सोमपीतये|	here yoking for the somadraught these horses sharers of thy feast.
हरी इन्द्र परतद्वसू अभि सवर|	thy bay steeds indra fraught with weal tb consent to come.
अभि सवरन्तु ये तव रुद्रासः सक्षत शरियम|	attendants on thy glory let the rudras roar assent to thee.
उतो मरुत्वतीर्विशो अभि परयः|	and all the marut companies come tothe feast.
इमा अस्य परतूर्तयः पदं जुषन्त यद दिवि|	these his victorious followers bold in the heavens the place they love.
नाभा यज्ञस्य सं दधुर्यथा विदे|	leagued in the heart of sacrifice as well we know.
अयं दीर्घाय चक्षसे पराचि परयत्यध्वरे|	that we may long behold the light what time the ordered rite proceeds.
मिमीते यज्ञमानुषग विचक्ष्य|	he duly measures as he views the sacrifice.
वर्षायमिन्द्र ते रथ उतो ते वर्षणा हरी|	o indra strong is this thy car and strong are these bay steeds of thine.
वर्षा तवंशतक्रतो वर्षा हवः|	o Śatakratu thou art strong strong is our call.
वर्षा गरावा वर्षा मदो वर्षा सोमो अयं सुतः|	strong is the pressstone strong thy joy strong is the flowing soma juice.
वर्षायज्ञो यमिन्वसि वर्षा हवः|	strong is the rite thou furtherest strong is our call.
वर्षा तवा वर्षणं हुवे वज्रिञ्चित्राभिरुतिभिः|	as strong i call on thee the strong o thunderer with thy thousand aids.
वावन्थ हि परतिष्टुतिं वर्षा हवः|	for thou hast won the hymn of praise strong is our call.
आ गन्ता मा रिषण्यत परस्थावानो माप सथाता समन्यवः|	let none swift travellers check you come hither likespirited stay not far away.
सथिरा चिन नमयिष्णवः|	ye benders even of what is firm.
वीळुपविभिर्मरुत रभुक्षण आ रुद्रासः सुदीतिभिः|	maruts Ṛbhukṣans rudras come ye with your cars strongfellied and exceeding bright.
इषा नो अद्या गता पुरुस्प्र्हो यज्ञमा सोभरीयवः|	come ye for whom we long with food to sacrifice come ye with love to sobbari.
विद्मा हि रुद्रियाणां शुष्ममुग्रं मरुतां शिमीवताम|	for well we know the vigorous might of rudras sons the martits who are passing strong.
विष्णोरेषस्य मीळ्हुषाम|	swift viṣṇus band who send the rain.
वि दवीपानि पापतन तिष्ठद दुछुनोभे युजन्त रोदसी|	islands are bursting forth and misery is stayed the heaven and earth are joined in one.
पर धन्वान्यैरत शुभ्रखादयो यदेजथ सवभानवः|	decked with bright rings ye spread the broad expanses out when ye self luminous stirred yourselves.
अच्युता चिद वो अज्मन्ना नानदति पर्वतासो वनस्पतिः|	even things immovable shake and reel the mountains and the forest trees at your approach.
भूमिर्यामेषु रेजते|	and the earth trembles as ye come.
अमाय वो मरुतो यातवे दयौर्जिहीत उत्तरा बर्हत|	to lend free course o maruts to your furious rush heaven high and higher still gives way.
यत्रा नरो देदिशते तनूष्वा तवक्षांसि बाह्वोजसः|	where they the heroes mighty with their arms display their gleaming omaments on their forms.
सवधामनु शरियं नरो महि तवेषा अमवन्तो वर्षप्सवः|	after their godlike nature they the bull like heroes dazzling and impetuous wear.
वहन्ते अह्रुतप्सवः|	great splendour as they show erect.
गोभिर्वाणो अज्यते सोभरीणां रथे कोशे हिरण्यये|	the pivot of the sobharis chariot within the golden box is balmed with milk.
गोबन्धवः सुजातास इषे भुजे महान्तो नः सपरसे नु|	may they the wellborn mighty kindred of the cow aid us to food and to delight.
परति वो वर्षदञ्जयो वर्ष्णे शर्धाय मारुताय भरध्वम|	bring ye who sprinkle balmy drops oblations to your vigorous marut company.
हव्या वर्षप्रयाव्णे|	to those whose leader is the bull.
वर्षणश्वेन मरुतो वर्षप्सुना रथेन वर्षनाभिना|	come hither o ye mares on your stronghorsed car solid in look with solid naves.
आ शयेनासो न पक्षिणो वर्था नरो हव्या नो वीतये गत|	lightly like winged falcons o ye heroes come come to enjoy our ofrerings.
समानमञ्ज्येषां वि भराजन्ते रुक्मासो अधि बाहुषु|	their decoration is the same their omaments of gold are bright upon their arms.
दविद्युतत्य रष्टयः|	their lances glitter splendidly.
त उग्रासो वर्षण उग्रबाहवो नकिष टनूषु येतिरे|	they toil not to defend their bodies from attack strong heroes with their mighty arms.
सथिरा धन्वान्यायुधा रथेषु वोअनीकेष्वधि शरियः|	strong are your bows and strong the weapons in your cars and glory sits on every face.
येषामर्णो न सप्रथो नाम तवेषं शश्वतामेकमिद्भुजे|	whose name extendeth like a sea alone resplendent so that all have joy in it.
वयो न पित्र्यं सहः|	and lifepower like ancestral might.
तान वन्दस्व मरुतस्तानुप सतुहि तेषां हि धुनीनाम|	pay honour to these maruts and sing praise to them for of the wheelspokes of the car.
अराणां न चरमस्तदेषां दाना मह्ना तदेषाम|	of these loud roarers none is last this is their power this moves them to give mighty gifts.
सुभगः स व ऊतिष्वास पूर्वासु मरुतो वयुष्टिषु|	blest by your favouring help was he o maruts at the earlier flushings of the morn.
योवा नूनमुतासति|	and even now shall he be blest.
यस्य वा यूयं परति वाजिनो नर आ हव्या वीतये गथ|	the strong man to whose sacrifice o heroes ye approach that ye may taste thereof.
अभि ष दयुम्नैरुत वाजसातिभिः सुम्ना वो धूतयो नशत|	with glories and with war that winneth spoil shall gain great bliss ye shakers of the world.
यथा रुद्रस्य सूनवो दिवो वशन्त्यसुरस्य वेधसः|	even as rudras sons the brood of the creator dyaus the asura desire.
युवानस्तथेदसत|	o youthful ones so shall it be.
ये चार्हन्ति मरुतः सुदानवः समन मीळ्हुषश्चरन्ति ये|	and these the bounteous worthy of the maruts who move onward pouring down the rain.
अतश्चिदा न उप वस्यसा हर्दा युवान आ वव्र्ध्वम|	even for their sake o youthful ones with kindest heart take us to you to be your own.
यून ऊ षु नविष्ठया वर्ष्णः पावकानभि सोभरे गिरा|	o sobhari with newest song sing out unto the youthful purifying bulls.
गाय गा इव चर्क्र्षत|	even as a plougher to his steers.
साहा ये सन्ति मुष्टिहेव हव्यो विश्वासु पर्त्सु होत्र्षु|	who like a celebrated boxer overcome the challengers in every fight.
वर्ष्णश्चन्द्रान न सुश्रवस्तमान गिरा वन्दस्व मरुतो अह|	they who like shining bulls are most illustrioushonour those maruts with thy song.
गावश्चिद घा समन्यवः सजात्येन मरुतः सबन्धवः|	allied by common ancestry ye maruts even the cows alike in energy.
रिहते ककुभो मिथः|	lick all by turns each others head.
मर्तश्चिद वो नर्तवो रुक्मवक्षस उप भरात्र्त्वमायति|	even mortal man ye dancers breast adorned with gold attains to brotherhood with you.
अधिनो गात मरुतः सदा हि व आपित्वमस्ति निध्रुवि|	mark ye and notice us o maruts evermore your friendship is secured to us.
मरुतो मारुतस्य न आ भेषजस्य वहता सुदानवः|	o maruts rich in noble gifts bring us a portion of the maruts medicine.
यूयंसखायः सप्तयः|	ye coursers who are friends to us.
याभिः सिन्धुमवथ याभिस्तूर्वथ याभिर्दशस्यथाक्रिविम|	haters of those who serve you not blissbringers bring us bliss with those auspicious aids.
मयो नो भूतोतिभिर्मयोभुवः शिवाभिरसचद्विषः|	wherewith ye are victorious and guard sindhu well and succour krvi in his need.
यत सिन्धौ यदसिक्न्यां यत समुद्रेषु मरुतः सुबर्हिषः|	maruts who rest on fair trimmed grass what balm soever sindhu or asikni hath.
यत पर्वतेषु भेषजम|	or mountains or the seas contain.
विश्वं पश्यन्तो बिभ्र्था तनूष्वा तेना नो अधि वोचत|	ye carry on your bodies ye who see it all so bless us graciously therewith.
कषमा रपो मरुत आतुरस्य न इष्कर्ता विह्रुतं पुनः|	cast maruts to the ground our sick mans malady replace the dislocated limb.
ता वां विश्वस्य गोपा देवा देवेषु यज्ञिय|	i worship you who guard this all gods holiest among the gods.
रतावाना यजसे पुतदक्षसा|	you faithful to the law whose power is sanctified.
मित्रा तना न रथ्या वरुणो यश्च सुक्रतुः|	so too like charioteers are they mitra and sapient varuṇa.
सनात सुजाता तनया धर्तव्रता|	sons highborn from of old whose holy laws stand fast.
ता माता विश्ववेदसासुर्याय परमहसा|	these twain possessors of all wealth most glorious for supremest sway.
महि जजानादितिरतावरी|	aditi mighty mother true to law brought forth.
महान्ता मित्रावरुणा सम्राजा देवावसुरा|	great varuṇa and mitra gods asuras and imperial lords.
रतावानाव्र्तमा घोषतो बर्हत|	true to eternal law proclaim the high decree.
नपाता शवसो महः सूनू दक्षस्य सुक्रतु|	the offspring of a lofty power dakṣas two sons exceeding strong.
सर्प्रदानू इषो वास्त्वधि कषितः|	who lords of flowing rain dwell in the place of food.
सं या दानूनि येमथुर्दिव्याः पार्थिवीरिषः|	ye who have gathered up your gifts celestial and terrestrial food.
नभस्वतीरा वां चरन्तु वर्ष्टयः|	let your rain come to us fraught with the mist of heaven.
अधि या बर्हतो दिवोअभि यूथेव पश्यतः|	the twain who from the lofty sky seem to look down on herds below.
रतावाना सम्राजा नमसे हिता|	holy imperial lords are set to be revered.
रतावाना नि षेदतुः साम्राज्याय सुक्रतू|	they true to law exceeding strong have sat them down for savran rule.
धर्तव्रता कषत्रिया कषत्रमशतुः|	princes whose laws stand fast they have obtained their sway.
अक्ष्णश्चिद गातुवित्तरनुल्बणेन चक्षसा|	pathfinders even better than the eye with unobstructed sight.
नि चिन मिषन्ता निचिरा नि चिक्यतुः|	even when they close their lids observant they perceive.
उत नो देव्यदितिरुरुष्यतां नासत्या|	so may the goddess aditi may the nāsatyas guard us well.
उरुष्यन्तु मरुतो वर्द्धशवसः|	the martits guard us wellendowed with mighty strength.
ते नो नावमुरुष्यत दिवा नक्तं सुदानवः|	do ye o bounteous gods protect our dwelling lace by day and night.
अरिष्यन्तो निपायुभिः सचेमहि|	with you for our defenders may we go unharmed.
अघ्नते विष्णवे वयमरिष्यन्तः सुदानवे|	may we unharmed serve bountiful viṣṇu the god who slayeth none.
शरुधि सवयावन सिन्धो पूर्वचित्तये|	selfmoving sindhu hear and be the first to mark.
तद वार्यं वर्णीमहे वरिष्ठं गोपयत्यम|	this sure protection we elect desirable and reaching far.
मित्रो यत पान्ति वरुणो यदर्यमा|	which mitra varuṇa and aryaman afford.
उत नः सिन्धुरपां तन मरुतस्तदश्विना|	and may the sindhu of the floods the maruts and the asvin pair.
इन्द्रो विष्णुर्मीढ्वांसः सजोषसः|	boon indra and boon viṣṇu have one mind with us.
ते हि षमा वनुषो नरोअभिमातिं कयस्य चित|	because these warring heroes stay the enmity of every foe.
तिग्मं नक्षोदः परतिघ्नन्ति भूर्णयः|	as the fierce waterflood repels the furious ones.
अयमेक इत्था पुरूरु चष्टे वि विष्पतिः|	here this one god the lord of men looks forth exceeding far and wide.
तस्य वरतान्यनु वश्चरमसि|	and we for your advantage keep his holy laws.
अनु पूर्वाण्योक्या साम्राज्यस्य सश्चिम|	we keep the old accustomed laws the statutes of supremacy.
मित्रस्य वरता वरुणस्य दिर्घश्रुत|	the iongknown laws of mitra and of varuṇa.
परि यो रश्मिना दिवोअन्तान ममे पर्थिव्याः|	he who hath measured with his ray the boundaries of heaven and earth.
उभे आ पप्रौरोदसी महित्वा|	and with his majesty hath filled the two worlds full.
उदु षय शरणे दिवो जयोतिरयंस्त सूर्यः|	sūrya hath spread his light aloft up to the region of the sky.
अग्निर्न शुक्रः समिधान आहुतः|	like agni all aflame when gifts are offered him.
वचो दीर्घप्रसद्मनीशे वाजस्य गोमतः|	with him who sits afar the word is lord of food that comes from kine.
ईशे हि पित्वोऽविषस्य दावने|	controller of the gift of unempoisoned food.
तत सूर्यं रोदसी उभे दोषा वस्तोरुप बरुवे|	so unto sūrya heaven and earth at morning and at eve i speak.
भोजेष्वस्मानभ्युच्चरा सदा|	bringing enjoyments ever rise thou up for us.
रज्रमुक्षण्यायने रजतं हरयाणे|	from uksanyayana a bay from harayana a white steed.
रथं युक्तमसनाम सुषामणि|	and from susaman we obtained a hamessed car.
ता मे अश्व्यानां हरीणां नितोशना|	these two shall bring me further gain of troops of tawnycoloured steeds.
उतो नु कर्त्व्यानां नर्वाहसा|	the carriers shall they be of active men of war.
समदभीषू कशावन्ता विप्रा नविष्ठया मती|	and the two sages have i gained who hold the reins and bear the whip.
महो वाजिनावर्वन्ता सचासनम|	and the two great strong coursers with my newest song.
उभयं शर्णवच्च न इन्द्रो अर्वागिदं वचः|	prepare oblation let him come and let the minister serve again.
सत्राच्यामघवा सोमपीतये धिया शविष्ठ आ गमत|	who knows the ordering thereof.
तं हि सवराजं वर्षभं तमोजसे धिषणे निष्टतक्षतुः|	rejoicing in his friendship let the priest be seated over man.
उतोपमानां परथमो नि षीदसि सोमकामं हि ते मनः|	beside the shoot of active power.
आ वर्षस्व पुरूवसो सुतस्येन्द्रान्धसः|	him glowing bright beyond all thought they seek among the race of man.
विद्मा हि तवा हरिवः पर्त्सु सासहिमध्र्ष्टं चिद दध्र्ष्वणिम|	with him for tongue they seize the food.
अप्रामिसत्य मघवन तथेदसदिन्द्र करत्वा यथा वशः|	he hath inflamed the twofold plain lifegiving he hath climbed the wood.
सनेम वाजं तव शिप्रिन्नवसा मक्षू चिद यन्तो अद्रिवः|	and with his tongue hath struck the rock.
शग्ध्यू षु शचीपत इन्द्र विश्वाभिरूतिभिः|	wandering here the radiant calf finds none to fetter him and seeks.
भगंन हि तवा यशसं वसुविदमनु शूर चरामसि|	the mother to declare his praise.
पौरो अश्वस्य पुरुक्र्द गवामस्युत्सो देव हिरण्ययः|	and now that great and mighty team the team of horses that are his.
नकिर्हि दानं परिमर्धिषत तवे यदयद यामि तदा भर|	and traces of his car are seen.
तवं हयेहि चेरवे विदा भगं वसुत्तये|	the seven milk a single cow the two set other five to work.
उद वाव्र्षस्व मघवन गविष्टय उदिन्द्राश्वमिष्टये|	on the streams loudresounding bank.
तवं पुरू सहस्राणि शतानि च यूथा दानाय मंहसे|	entreated by vivasvāns ten indra cast down the waterjar.
आ पुरन्दरं चक्र्म विप्रवचस इन्द्रं गायन्तोअवसे|	with threefold hammer from the sky.
अविप्रो वा यदविधद विप्रो वेन्द्र ते वचः|	three times the newlykindled flame proceeds around the sacrifice.
स पर ममन्दत्त्वाया शतक्रतो पराचामन्यो अहंसन|	the priests anoint it with the meath.
उग्रबाहुर्म्रक्षक्र्त्वा पुरन्दरो यदि मे शर्णवद धवम|	with reverence they drain the fount that circles with its wheel above.
वसूयवो वसुपतिं शतक्रतुं सतोमैरिन्द्रं हवामहे|	exhaustless with the mouth below.
न पापासो मनामहे नारायासो न जळ्हवः|	the pressingstones are set at work the meath is poured into the tank.
यदिन नविन्द्रं वर्षणं सचा सुते सखायं कर्णवामहै|	at the outshedding of the fount.
उग्रं युयुज्म पर्तनासु सासहिं रणकातिमदाभ्यम|	ye cows protect the fount the two mighty ones bless the sacrifice.
वेदा भर्मं चित सनिता रथीतमो वाजिनं यमिदू नशत|	the handles twain are wrought of gold.
यत इन्द्र भयामहे ततो नो अभयं कर्धि|	pour on the juice the ornament which reaches both the heaven and earth.
मघवञ्छग्धितव तन न ऊतिभिर्वि दविषो वि मर्धो जहि|	supply the liquid to the bull.
तवं हि राधस्पते राधसो महः कषयस्यासि विधतः|	these know their own abidingplace like calves beside the mother cows.
तं तवा वयं मघवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणः सुतावन्तो हवामहे|	they meet together with their kin.
इन्द्र सपळ उत वर्त्रहा परस्पा नो वरेण्यः|	devouring in their greedy jaws they make sustaining food in heaven.
स नो रक्षिषच्चरमं स मध्यमं स पश्चात पातु नः पुरः|	to indra agni light and prayer.
तवं नः पश्चादधरादुत्तरात पुर इन्द्र नि पाहि विश्वतः|	the pious one milked out rich food sustenance dealt in portions seven.
आरे अस्मत कर्णुहि दैव्यं भयमारे हेतीरदेवीः|	together with the suns seven rays.
अद्याद्या शवःशव इन्द्र तरास्व परे च नः|	i took some soma when the sun rose up o mitra varuṇa.
विश्वा च नोजरितॄन सत्पते अहा दिवा नक्तं च रक्षिषः|	that is the sick mans medicine.
परभङगी शूरो मघवा तुवीमघः सम्मिष्लो विर्याय कम|	from where oblations must be laid which is the wellbeloveds home.
उभा ते बाहू वर्षणा शतक्रतो नि या वज्रं मिमिक्षतुः|	he with his tongue hath compassed heaven.
ये तरिंशति तरयस परो देवासो बर्हिरासदन|	the thirty gods and three besides whose seat hath been the sacred grass.
विदन्नहद्वितासनन|	from time of old have found and gained.
वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा समद्रातिषाचो अग्नयः|	varuṇa mitra aryaman agnis with consorts sending boons.
पत्नीवन्तो वषट्क्र्ताः|	to whom our vaṣaṭ is addressed.
ते नो गोपा अपाच्यास्त उदक त इत्था नयक|	these are our guardians in the west and northward here and in the south.
पुरस्तात सर्वया विशा|	and on the cast with all the tribe.
यथा वशन्ति देवास्तथेदसत तदेषां नकिरा मिनत|	even as the gods desire so verily shall it be none minisheth this power of theirs.
अरावा चन मर्त्यः|	no demon and no mortal.
सप्तानां सप्त रष्टयः सप्त दयुम्नान्येषाम|	the seven carry seven spears seven are the splendours they possess.
सप्तो अधि शरियो धिरे|	and seven the glories they assume.
पर यद वस्त्रिष्टुभमिषं मरुतो विप्रो अक्षरत|	o maruts when the sage hath poured the tṛṣṭup forth as food for you.
वि पर्वतेषु राजथ|	ye shine amid the mountainclouds.
यदङग तविषीयवो यामं शुभ्रा अचिध्वम|	when bright ones fain to show your might ye have determined on your course.
नि पर्वता अहासत|	the mountainclouds have bent them down.
उदीरयन्त वायुभिर्वाश्रासः पर्श्निमातरः|	loud roaring with the winds the sons of pṛśni have upraised themselves.
धुक्षन्तपिप्युशीमिषम|	they have poured out the streaming food.
वपन्ति मरुतो मिहं पर वेपयन्ति पर्वतान|	the maruts spread the mist abroad and make mountains rock and reel.
यद यामं यान्ति वायुभिः|	when with the winds they go their way.
नि यद यामाय वो गिरिर्नि सिन्धवो विधर्मणे|	what time the rivers and the hills before your coming bowed them down.
महे शुष्माय येमिरे|	so to sustain your mighty force.
युष्मानु नक्तमूतये युष्मान दिवा हवामहे|	we call on you for aid by night on you for succour in the day.
युष्मान परयत्यध्वरे|	on you while sacrifice proceeds.
उदु तये अरुणप्सवश्चित्रा यामेभिरीरते|	these verily wondrous red of hue speed on their courses with a roar.
वाश्रा अधिष्णुना दिवः|	over the ridges of the sky.
सर्जन्ति रश्मिमोजसा पन्थां सूर्याय यातवे|	with might they drop the loosened rein so that the sun may run his course.
ते भानुभिर्वि तस्थिरे|	and spread themselves with beams of light.
इमां मे मरुतो गिरमिमं सतोमं रभुक्षणः|	accept ye maruts this my song accept ye this mine hymn of praise.
इमं मे वनता हवम|	accept Ṛbhukṣans this my call.
तरीणि सरांसि पर्श्नयो दुदुह्रे वज्रिणे मधु|	the dappled cows have poured three lakes meath for the thunderwielding god.
उत्सं कवन्धमुद्रिणम|	from the great cask the watery cloud.
मरुतो यद ध वो दिवः सुम्नायन्तो हवामहे|	o maruts quickly come to us when longing for felicity.
आ तू न उपगन्तन|	we call you hither from the sky.
यूयं हि षठा सुदानवो रुद्रा रभुक्षणो दमे|	for rudras and Ṛbhukṣans ye most bountiful are in the house.
उत परचेतसो मदे|	wise when the gladdening draught is drunk.
आ नो रयिं मदच्युतं पुरुक्षुं विश्वधायसम|	o maruts send us down from heaven riches distilling rapturous joy.
इयर्ता मरुतो दिवः|	with plenteous food sustaining all.
अधीव यद गिरीणां यामं शुभ्रा अचिध्वम|	when bright ones hither from the hills ye have resolved to take your way.
सुवानैर्मन्दध्व इन्दुभिः|	ye revel in the drops effused.
एतावतश्चिदेषां सुम्नं भिक्षेत मर्त्यः|	man should solicit with his lauds happiness which belongs to them.
अदाभ्यस्य मन्मभिः|	so great a band invincible.
ये दरप्सा इव रोदसी धमन्त्यनु वर्ष्टिभिः|	they who like fiery sparks with showers of rain blow through the heaven and earth.
उत्सं दुहन्तो अक्षितम|	milking the spring that never fails.
उदु सवानेभिरीरत उद रथैरुदु वायुभिः|	with chariots and tumultuous roar with tempests and with hymns of praise.
उत सतोमैः पर्श्निमातरः|	the sons of pṛśni hurry forth.
येनाव तुर्वशं यदुं येन कण्वं धनस्प्र्तम|	for wealth we think of that whereby ye aided yadu turvaśa.
राये सु तस्य धीमहि|	and kanva who obtained the spoil.
इमा उ वः सुदानवो घर्तं न पिप्युषीरिषः|	may these our viands bounteous ones i that flow in streams like holy oil.
वर्धान काण्वस्य मन्मभिः|	with kaṇvas hymns increase your might.
कव नूनं सुदानवो मदथा वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	where bounteous lords for whom the grass is trimmed are ye rejoicing now.
बरह्मा को वःसपर्यति|	what brahman is adoring you.
नहि षम यद ध वः पुरा सतोमेभिर्व्र्क्तबर्हिषः|	is it not there where ye of old supplied with sacred grass for lauds.
शर्धान रतस्य जिन्वथ|	inspired the strong in sacrifice.
समु तये महतीरपः सं कषोणी समु सूर्यम|	they brought together both the worlds the mighty waters and the sun.
सं वज्रं पर्वशो दधुः|	and joint by joint the thunderbolt.
वि वर्त्रं पर्वशो ययुर्वि पर्वतानराजिनः|	they sundered vṛtra limb from limb and split the gloomy mountainclouds.
चक्राणा वर्ष्णि पौंस्यम|	performing a heroic deed.
अनु तरितस्य युध्यतः शुष्ममावन्नुत करतुम|	they reinforced the power and strength of trita as he fought and helped.
अन्विन्द्रं वर्त्रतूर्ये|	indra in battle with the foe.
विद्युद्धस्ता अभिद्यवः शिप्राः शीर्षन हिरण्ययीः|	they deck themselves for glory bright celestial lightning in their hands.
शुभ्रा वयञ्जत शरिये|	and helms of gold upon their heads.
उशना यत परावत उक्ष्णो रन्ध्रमयातन|	when eagerly ye from far away came to the cavern of the bull.
दयौर्न चक्रदद भिया|	he bellowed in his fear like heaven.
आ नो मखस्य दावनेअश्वैर्हिरण्यपाणिभिः|	borne by your goldenfooted steeds o gods come hither to receive.
देवास उप गन्तन|	the sacrifice we offer you.
यदेषां पर्षती रथे परष्टिर्वहति रोहितः|	when the red leader draws along their spotted deer yoked to the car.
यान्ति शुभ्रा रिणन्नपः|	the bright ones come and shed the rain.
सुषोमे शर्यणावत्यार्जीके पस्त्यावति|	susoma saryakiavan and arjika full of homes have they.
ययुर्निचक्रया नरः|	these heroes sought with downward car.
कदा गछाथ मरुत इत्था विप्रं हवमानम|	when maruts ye come to him the singer who invokes you thus.
मार्डीकेभिर्नाधमानम|	with favours to your suppliant.
कद ध नूनं कधप्रियो यदिन्द्रमजहातन|	what now where have ye still a friend since ye left indra all alone.
को वः सखित्व ओहते|	who counteth on your friendship now.
सहो षु णो वज्रहस्तैः कण्वासो अग्निं मरुद्भिः|	the kaṇvas sing forth agnis praise together with our maruts who.
सतुषेहिरण्यवाशीभिः|	wield thunder and wear swords of gold.
ओ षु वर्ष्णः परयज्यूना नव्यसे सुविताय|	hither for new felicity may i attract the impetuous ones.
वव्र्त्यां चित्रवाजान|	the heroes with their wondrous strength.
गिरयश्चिन नि जिहते पर्शानासो मन्यमानाः|	before them sink the very hills deerning themseives abysses yea.
पर्वताश्चिन नि येमिरे|	even the mountains bend them down.
आक्ष्णयावानो वहन्त्यन्तरिक्षेण पततः|	steeds flying on their tortuous path through midair carry them and give.
धातारः सतुवते वयः|	the man who lauds them strength and life.
अग्निर्हि जानि पूर्व्यश्छन्दो न सूरो अर्चिषा|	agni was born the first of all like sūrya lovely with his light.
ते भानुभिर्वि तस्थिरे|	with lustre these have spread abroad.
वयमु तवामपूर्व्य सथूरं न कच्चिद भरन्तोअवस्यवः|	we call on thee o matchless one we seeking help possessing nothing firm ourselves.
वाजे चित्रं हवामहे|	call on thee wonderful in fight.
उप तवा कर्मन्नूतये स नो युवोग्रश्चक्राम यो धर्षत|	on thee for aid in sacrifice this youth of ours the bold the mighty hath gonse forth.
तवामिद धयवितारं वव्र्महे सखाय इन्द्र सानसिम|	we therefore we thy friends indra havie chosen thee freegiver as our guardian god.
आ याहीम इन्दवोअश्वपते गोपत उर्वरापते|	come hither for the drops are here o lord of cornlands lord of horses lord of kine.
सोमं सोमपते पिब|	drink thou the soma somas lord.
वयं हि तवा बन्धुमन्तमबन्धवो विप्रास इन्द्र येमिम|	for we the kinless singers have drawn hither thee o indra who hast numerous kin.
या ते धामानि वर्षभ तेभिरा गहि विश्वेभिः सोमपीतये|	with all the forms thou hast comic thou of bulllike strength come near to drink the soma juice.
सीदन्तस्ते वयो यथा गोश्रीते मधौ मदिरे विवक्षणे|	sitting like birds beside thy meath mingled with milk that gladdeneth and exalteth thee.
अभि तवामिन्द्र नोनुमः|	indra to thee we sing aloud.
अछा च तवैना नमसा वदामसि किं मुहुश्चिद वि दीधयः|	we speak to thee with this our reverential prayer why art thou pondering yet awhile.
सन्ति कामासो हरिवो ददिष टवं समो वयं सन्ति नो धियः|	here are our wishes thou art liberal lord of bays we and our hymns are present here.
नूत्ना इदिन्द्र ते वयमूती अभूम नहि नू ते अद्रिवः|	for not in recent times alone o indra thunderarmed have we obtained thine aid.
विद्मा पुरा परीणसः|	of old we knew thy plenteous wealth.
विद्मा सखित्वमुत शूर भोज्यमा ते ता वज्रिन्नीमहे|	hero we knew thy friendship and thy rich rewards these thunderer now we crave of thee.
उतो समस्मिन्ना शिशीहि नो वसो वाजे सुशिप्र गोमति|	o vasu for all wealth that cometh of the kine sharpen our powers fairvisored god.
यो न इदमइदं पुरा पर वस्य आनिनाय तमु व सतुषे|	him who of old hath brought to us this and that blessing him i magnify for you.
सखाय इन्द्रमूतये|	even indra o my friends for help.
हर्यश्वं सत्पतिं चर्षणीसहं स हि षमा यो अमन्दत|	borne by bay steeds the lord of heroes ruling men for it is he who takes delight.
आ तु नः स वयति गव्यमश्व्यं सतोत्र्भ्यो मघवा शतम|	may maghavan bestow on us his worshippers hundreds of cattle and of steeds.
तवया ह सविद युजा वयं परति शवसन्तं वर्षभ बरुवीमहि|	hero may we with thee for friend withstand the man who pants against us in his wrath.
संस्थे जनस्य गोमतः|	in fight with people rich in kine.
जयेम कारे पुरुहूत कारिणोअभि तिष्ठेम दूढ्यः|	may we be victors in the singers battlesong and meet the wicked much invoked.
नर्भिर्व्र्त्रं हन्याम शूशुयाम चावेरिन्द्र पर णो धियः|	with heroes smite the foeman and show forth our strength o indra further thou our thoughts.
अभ्रात्र्व्यो अना तवमनापिरिन्द्र जनुषा सनादसि|	o indra from all ancient time rivalless ever and companionless art thou.
युधेदापित्वमिछसे|	thou seekest comradeship in war.
नकी रेवन्तं सख्याय विन्दसे पीयन्ति ते सुराश्वः|	thou findest not the wealthy man to be thy friend those scorn thee who are flown with wine.
यदा कर्णोषि नदनुं समूहस्यादित पितेव हूयसे|	what time thou thunderest and gatherest then thou even as a father art invoked.
मा ते अमाजुरो यथा मूरास इन्द्र सख्ये तवावतः|	o indra let us not like fools who waste their lives at home with friendship such as thine.
नि षदाम सचा सुते|	sit idly by the pouredout juice.
मा ते गोदत्र निरराम राधस इन्द्र मा ते गर्हामहि|	giver of kine may we not miss thy gracious gifts let us not rob thee of thine own.
दर्ळ्हा चिदर्यः पर मर्शाभ्या भर न ते दामान आदभे|	strip even the strong places of the foe and bring thy gifts can never be made vain.
इन्द्रो वा घेदियन मघं सरस्वती वा सुभगा ददिर्वसु|	indra or blest sarasvatī alone bestows such wealth treasure so great or thou.
तवं वा चित्र दाशुषे|	o citra on the worshipper.
चित्र इद राजा राजका इदन्यके यके सरस्वतीमनु|	citra is king and only kinglings are the rest who dwell beside sarasvatī.
पर्जन्य इव ततनद धि वर्ष्ट्या सहस्रमयुता ददत|	he like parjanya with his rain hath spread himself with thousand yea with myriad gifts.
य इन्द्र सोमपातमो मदः शविष्ठ चेतति|	joy mightiest indra known and marked sprung most from somadraughts wherewith.
येना हंसि नयत्रिणं तमीमहे|	thou smitest down the greedy fiend for that we long.
येना दशग्वमध्रिगुं वेपयन्तं सवर्णरम|	wherewith thou bolpest adhrigu the great daśagva and the god.
येना समुद्रमाविथा तमीमहे|	who stirs the sunlight and the sea for that we long.
येन सिन्धुं महीरपो रथानिव परचोदयः|	wherewith thou dravest forth like cars sindhu and all the mighty floods.
पन्थां रतस्य यातवे तमीमहे|	to go the way ordained by law for that we long.
इमं सतोममभिष्टये घर्तं न पूतमद्रिवः|	accept this laud for aid made pure like oil thou caster of the stone.
येना नुसद्य ओजसा ववक्षिथ|	whereby even in a moment thou hast waxen great.
इमं जुषस्व गिर्वणः समुद्र इव पिन्वते|	be pleased songlover with this song it flows abundant like the sea.
इन्द्र विश्वाभिरूतिभिर्ववक्षिथ|	indra with all thy succours thou hast waxen great.
यो नो देवः परावतः सखित्वनाय मामहे|	the god who from afar hath sent gifts to maintain our friendships bond.
दिवो न वर्ष्टिं परथयन ववक्षिथ|	thou spreading them like rain from heaven hast waxen great.
ववक्षुरस्य केतवो उत वज्रो गभस्त्योः|	the beams that mark him have grown strong the thunder rests between his arms.
यत सूर्यो न रोदसी अवर्धयत|	when like the sun he hath increased both heaven and earth.
यदि परव्र्द्ध सत्पते सहस्रं महिषानघः|	when mighty lord of heroes thou didst cat a thousand buffaloes.
आदित त इन्द्रियं महि पर वाव्र्धे|	then grew and waxed exceeding great thine indrapower.
इन्द्रः सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिर्न्यर्शसानमोषति|	indra consumeth with the rays of sūrya the malicious man.
अग्निर्वनेव सासहिः पर वाव्र्धे|	like agni conquering the woods he hath grown strong.
इयं त रत्वियावती धीतिरेति नवीयसी|	this newest thought of ours that suits the time approaches unto thee.
सपर्यन्ती पुरुप्रिया मिमीत इत|	serving beloved in many a place it metes and marks.
गर्भो यज्ञस्य देवयुः करतुं पुनीत आनुषक|	the pious germ of sacrifice directly purifies the soul.
सतोमैरिन्द्रस्य वाव्र्धे मिमीत इत|	by indras lauds it waxes great it metes and marks.
सनिर्मित्रस्य पप्रथ इन्द्रः सोमस्य पीतये|	indra who wins the friend hath spread himself to drink the somadraught.
पराची वाशीव सुन्वते मिमीत इत|	like worshippers dilating praise it metes and marks.
यं विप्रा उक्थवाहसोअभिप्रमन्दुरायवः|	he whom the sages living men have gladdened offering up their hymns.
घर्तं न पिप्य आसन्य रतस्य यत|	hath swelled like oil of sacrifice in agnis mouth.
उत सवराजे अदिति सतोममिन्द्राय जीजनत|	aditi also hath brought forth a hymn for indra sovran lord.
पुरुप्रशस्तमूतय रतस्य यत|	the work of sacrifice for help is glorified.
अभि वह्नय ऊतयेअनूषत परशस्तये|	the ministering priests have sung their songs for aid and eulogy.
न देव विव्रता हरी रतस्य यत|	god thy bays turn not from the rite which law ordains.
यत सोममिन्द्र विष्णवि यद वा घ तरित आप्त्ये|	if indra thou drink soma by viṣṇus or tṛta Āptyas side.
यद वा मरुत्सु मन्दसे समिन्दुभिः|	or with the maruts take delight in flowing drops.
यद वा शक्र परावति समुद्रे अधि मन्दसे|	or Śakra if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea of air.
अस्माकमित सुते रणा समिन्दुभिः|	rejoice thee in this juice of ours in flowing drops.
यद वासि सुन्वतो वर्धो यजमानस्य सत्पते|	or lord of heroes if thou aid the worshipper who shed the juice.
उक्थे वा यस्यरण्यसि समिन्दुभिः|	or him whose laud delights thee and his flowing drops.
देवंदेवं वोअवस इन्द्रमइन्द्रं गर्णीषणि|	to magnify the god the god indra yea indra for your help.
अधा यज्ञाय तुर्वणे वयानशुः|	and promptly end the sacrificethis have they gained.
यज्ञेभिर्यज्ञवाहसं सोमेभिः सोमपातमम|	with worship him whom men adore with soma him who drinks it most.
होत्राभिरिन्द्रं वाव्र्धुर्व्यानशुः|	indra with lauds have they increasedthis have they gained.
महीरस्य परणीतयः पूर्वीरुत परशस्तयः|	his leadings are with power and might and his instructions manifold.
विश्वा वसूनि दाशुषे वयानशुः|	he gives the worshipper all wealth this have they gained.
इन्द्रं वर्त्राय हन्तवे देवासो दधिरे पुरः|	for slaying vṛtra have the gods set indra in the foremost place.
इन्द्रं वाणीरनूषता समोजसे|	indra the choral bands have sung for vigorous strength.
महान्तं महिना वयं सतोमेभिर्हवनश्रुतम|	we to the mighty with our might with lauds to him who hears our call.
अर्कैरभिप्र णोनुमः समोजसे|	with holy hymns have sung aloud for vigorous strength.
न यं विविक्तो रोदसी नान्तरिक्षाणि वज्रिणम|	not earth nor heaven nor firmaments contain the thunderwielding god.
अमादिदस्य तित्विषे समोजसः|	they shake before his violent rush and vigorous strength.
यदिन्द्र पर्तनाज्ये देवास्त्वा दधिरे पुरः|	what time the gods o indra get thee foremost in the furious fight.
आदित ते हर्यता हरी ववक्षतुः|	then thy two beautiful bay steeds carried thee on.
यदा वर्त्रं नदीव्र्तं शवसा वज्रिन्नवधीः|	when vṛtra stayer of the floods thou siest thundeicr with might.
आदित ते|	then thy two beautiful bay steeds carried thee on.
यदा ते विष्णुरोजसा तरीणि पदा विचक्रमे|	when viṣṇu through thine energy strode wide those three great steps of his.
आदित ते|	then thy two beautiful bay steeds carried thee on.
यदा ते हर्यता हरी वाव्र्धाते दिवेदिवे|	when thy two beautiful bay steeds grew great and greater day by day.
आदित ते विश्वा भुवनानि येमिरे|	even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee.
यदा ते मारुतीर्विशस्तुभ्यमिन्द्र नियेमिरे|	when indra all the marut folk humbly submitted them to thee.
आ इत ते व|	even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee.
यदा सूर्यममुं दिवि शुक्रं जयोतिरधारयः|	when yonder sun that brilliant light thou settest in the heaven above.
आदित्ते व|	even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee.
इमां त इन्द्र सुष्टुतिं विप्र इयर्ति धीतिभिः|	to thee o indra with this thought the sage lifts up this eulogy.
जामिं पदेव पिप्रतीं पराध्वरे|	akin and leading as on foot to sacrifice.
यदस्य धामनि परिये समीचीनासो अस्वरन|	when in thine own dear dwelling all gathered have lifted up the voice.
नाभा यज्ञस्य दोहना पराध्वरे|	milkstreams at worships central spot for sacrifice.
सुवीर्यं सवश्व्यं सुगव्यं इन्द्र दद्धि नः|	as priest o indra give us wealth in brave men and good steeds ana kine.
होतेव पूर्वचित्तये पराध्वरे|	that we may first remember thee for sacrifice.
यत सथो दीर्घप्रसद्मनि यद वादो रोचने दिवः|	whether ye travel far away or dwell in yonder light of heaven.
यद वा समुद्रे अध्याक्र्ते गर्हेअत आ यातमश्विना|	or in a mansion that is built above the sea come thence ye aśvins hitherward.
यद वा यज्ञं मनवे सम्मिमिक्षथुरेवेत काण्वस्य बोधतम|	or if for manuye prepared the sacrifice remember also kaṇvas son.
बर्हस्पतिं विश्वान देवानहं हुव इन्द्राविष्णू अश्विनावाशुहेषसा|	i call bṛhaspati indra viṣṇu all the gods the aśvins borne by rapid steeds.
तया नवश्विना हुवे सुदंससा गर्भे कर्ता|	those aśvins i invoke who work marvels brought hither to receive.
ययोरस्ति परणः सख्यं देवेष्वध्याप्यम|	with whom our friendship is most famed and kinship passing that of gods.
ययोरधि पर यज्ञा असूरे सन्ति सूरयः|	on whom the solemn rites depend whose worshippers rise without the sun.
ता यज्ञस्याध्वरस्य परचेतसा सवधाभिर्या पिबतः सोम्यं मधु|	these who foreknow the holy work of sacrifice and by their godhead drink the sweets of soma juice.
यदद्याश्विनावपाग यत पराक सथो वाजिनीवसू|	whether ye lords of ample wealth now linger in the cast or west.
यद दरुह्यव्यनवि तुर्वशे यदौ हुवे वामथ मा गतम|	with druhyu or with anu yadu turvaga i call you hither come to me.
यदन्तरिक्षे पतथः पुरुभुजा यद वेमे रोदसी अनु|	lords of great riches whether through the firmament ye fly or speed through heaven and earth.
यद्वा सवधाभिरधितिष्ठथो रथमत आ यातमश्विना|	or with your godlike natures stand upon your cars come thence o aśvins hitherward.
बभ्रुरेको विषुणः सूनरो युवाञ्ज्यङकते हिरण्ययम|	one is a youth brown active manifold he decks the golden one with ornament.
योनिमेक आ ससाद दयोतनोअन्तर्देवेषु मेधिरः|	another luminous occupies the place of sacritice sage among the gods.
वाशीमेको बिभर्ति हस्त आयसीमन्तर्देवेषु निध्रुविः|	one brandishes in his hand an iron knife firm in his seat amid the deities.
वज्रमेको बिभर्ति हस्त आहितं तेन वर्त्राणि जिघ्नते|	another holds the thunderbolt wherewith he slays the vṛtras resting in his hand.
तिग्ममेको बिभर्ति हस्त आयुधं शुचिरुग्रो जलाषभेषजः|	another bears a pointed weapon bright is he and strong with healing medicines.
पथ एकः पीपाय तस्करो यथा एष वेद निधीनाम|	another thieflike watches well the ways and knows the places where the treasures lie.
तरीण्येक उरुगायो वि चक्रमे यत्र देवासो मदन्ति|	another with his mighty stride hath made his three steps thither where the gods rejoice.
विभिर्द्वा चरत एकया सह पर परवासेव वसतः|	two with one dame ride on with winged steeds and journey forth like travellers on their way.
सदो दवा चक्राते उपमा दिवि सम्राजा सर्पिरासुती|	two highest in the heavens have set their seat worshipped with holy oil imperial kings.
अर्चन्त एके महि साम मन्वत तेन सूर्यमरोचयन|	some singing lauds conceived the sāmahymn great hymn whereby they caused the sun to shine.
तवमग्ने वरतपा असि देव आ मर्त्येष्वा|	thou agni god mid mortal men art guard of sacred rites thou art.
तवं यज्ञेष्वीड्यः|	to be adored at sacrifice.
तवमसि परशस्यो विदथेषु सहन्त्य|	o mighty agni thou must be glorified at our festivals.
अग्ने रथीरध्वराणाम|	bearing our offerings to the gods.
स तवमस्मदप दविषो युयोधि जातवेदः|	o jātavedas agni fight and drive our foes afar from us.
अदेवीरग्ने अरातीः|	themand their godless enmities.
अन्ति चित सन्तमह यज्ञं मर्तस्य रिपोः|	thou jātavedas seekest not the worship of a hostile man.
नोप वेषि जातवेदः|	however nigh itbe to thee.
मर्ता अमर्त्यस्य ते भूरि नाम मनामहे|	we sages mortals as we are adore the mighty name oof thee.
विप्रासो जातवेदसः|	immortal jātavedas name.
विप्रं विप्रासोअवसे देवं मर्तास ऊतये|	sages we call the sage to help mortals we call the god to aid.
अग्निं गीर्भिर्हवामहे|	we call on agni with our songs.
आ ते वत्सो मनो यमत परमाच्चित सधस्थात|	may vatsa draw thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwellingplace.
अग्ने तवां कामया गिरा|	agni with song that yearns for thee.
पुरुत्रा हि सद्रंं असि विशो विश्वा अनु परभुः|	thou art the same in many a place mid all the people thou art lord.
समत्सुत्वा हवामहे|	in fray and fightt we call on thee.
समत्स्वग्निमवसे वाजयन्तो हवामहे|	when we are seeking strength we call agni to help us in the strife.
वाजेषु चित्रराधसम|	the giver of rich gifts in war.
परत्नो हि कमीड्यो अध्वरेषु सनाच्च होता नव्यश्च सत्सि|	ancient adorablie at sacrifices priest from of old meet for our praise thou sittest.
सवां चाग्ने तन्वं पिप्रयस्वास्मभ्यं च सौभगमा यजस्व|	fill full and satisfy thy body agni and win us happiness by offering worship.
अस्तभ्नाद दयामसुरो विश्ववेदा अमिमीत वरिमाणं पर्थिव्याः|	lord of all wealth the asura propped the heavens and measured out the broad earths wide expanses.
आसीदद विश्वा भुवनानि सम्राड विश्वेत तानि वरुणस्य वरतानि|	he king supreme approached all living creatures all these are varuṇas holy operations.
एवा वन्दस्व वरुणं बर्हन्तं नमस्या धीरमम्र्तस्य गोपाम|	so humbly worship varuṇa the mighty revere the wise guard of world immortal.
स नः शर्म तरिवरूथं वि यंसत पातं नो दयावाप्र्थिवी उपस्थे|	may he vouchsafe us triplybarred protection o earth and heaven within your lap preserve us.
इमां धियं शिक्षमाणस्य देव करतुं दक्षं वरुण सं शिशाधि|	sharpen this song of him who strives his utmost sharpen god varuṇa his strength and insight.
ययाति विश्वा दुरिता तरेम सुतर्माणमधि नावं रुहेम|	may we ascend the ship that bears us safely whereby we may pass over all misfortune.
आ वां गरावाणो अश्विना धीभिर्विप्रा अचुच्यवुः|	aśvins with songs the singer stones have made you hasten hitherward.
नासत्या सोमपीतये नभन्तामन्यके समे|	nāsatyas to the somadraught let all the others die away.
यथा वामत्रिरश्विना गीर्भिर्विप्रो अजोहवीत|	as the sage atri with his hymns o aśvins called you eagerly.
नासत्यासोमपीतये नभन्तामन्यके समे|	nāsatyas to the somadraught let all the others die away.
एवा वामह्व ऊतये यथाहुवन्त मेधिराः|	so have i called you to our aid even as the wise have called of old.
नासत्या सोमपीतये नभन्तामन्यके समे|	nāsatyas to the somadraught let all the others die away.
इदं ह नूनमेषां सुम्नं भिक्षेत मर्त्यः|	now let the mortal offer prayer to win the unexampled grace.
आदित्यानामपूर्व्यं सवीमनि|	of these Ādityas and their aid to cherish life.
अनर्वाणो हयेषां पन्था आदित्यानाम|	for not an enemy molests the paths which these Ādityas tread.
अदब्धाः सन्ति पायवः सुगेव्र्धः|	infallible guards they strengthen us in happiness.
तत सु नः सविता भगो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	now soon may bhaga savitar varuṇa mitra aryaman.
शर्म यछन्तु सप्रथो यदीमहे|	give us the shelter widely spread which we implore.
देवेभिर्देव्यदितेअरिष्टभर्मन्ना गहि|	with gods come thou whose fostering care none checks o goddesss aditi.
समत सूरिभिः पुरुप्रिये सुशर्मभिः|	come dear to many with the lords who guard us well.
ते हि पुत्रासो अदितेर्विदुर्द्वेषांसि योतवे|	for well these sons of aditi know to keep enmities aloof.
अंहोश्चिदुरुचक्रयोअनेहसः|	unrivalled giving ample room they save from woe.
अदितिर्नो दिवा पशुमदितिर्नक्तमद्वयाः|	aditi guard our herd by day aditi free from guile by night.
अदितिः पात्वंहसः सदाव्र्धा|	aditi ever strengthening save us from grief.
उत सया नो दिवा मतिरदितिरूत्या गमत|	and in the day our hymn is this may aditi come nigh to help.
सा शन्ताति मयस करदप सरिधः|	with lovingkindness bring us weal and chase our foes.
उत तया दैव्या भिषजा शं नः करतो अश्विना|	and may the aśvins the divine pair of physicians send us health.
युयुयातामितो रपो अप सरिधः|	may they remove iniquity and chase our foes.
शमग्निरग्निभिः करच्छं नस्तपतु सूर्यः|	may agni bless us with his fires and sūrya warm us pleasantly.
शं वातो वात्वरपा अप सरिधः|	may the pure wind breathe sweet on us and chase our foes.
अपामीवामप सरिधमप सेधत दुर्मतिम|	drive ye disease and strife away drive ye away malignity.
आदित्यासो युयोतना नो अंहसः|	Ādityas keep us ever far from sore distress.
युयोता शरुमस्मदानादित्यास उतामतिम|	remove from us the arrow keep famine Ādityas far away.
रधग दवेषःक्र्णुत विश्ववेदसः|	keep enmities afar from us lords of all wealth.
तत सु नः शर्म यछतादित्या यन मुमोचति|	now o Ādityas grant to us the shelter that lets man go free.
एनस्वन्तं चिदेनसः सुदानवः|	yea even the sinner from his sin ye bounteous gods.
यो नः कश्चिद रिरिक्षति रक्षस्त्वेन मर्त्यः|	whatever mortal with the powe r of demons fain would injure us.
सवैः षेवै रिरिषीष्ट युर्जनः|	may he impetuous suffer harm by his own deeds.
समित तमघमश्नवद दुःशंसं मर्त्यं रिपुम|	may sin oertake our human foe the man who speaketh evil thing.
यो अस्मत्रा दुर्हणावानुप दवयुः|	him who would cause our misery whose heart is false.
पाकत्रा सथन देवा हर्त्सु जानीथ मर्त्यम|	gods ye are with the simple ones ye know each mortal in your hearts.
उप दवयुं चाद्वयुं च वसवः|	ye vasus well discriminate the false and true.
आ शर्म पर्वतानामोतापां वर्णीमहे|	fain would we have the sheltering aid of mountains and of waterfloods.
दयावाक्षामारे अस्मद रपस कर्तम|	keep far from us iniquity o heaven and earth.
ते नो भद्रेण शर्मणा युष्माकं नावा वसवः|	so with auspicious sheltering aid do ye o vasus carry us.
अति विश्वानि दुरिता पिपर्तन|	beyond all trouble and distress borne in your ship.
तुचे तनाय तत सु नो दराघीय आयुर्जीवसे|	Ādityas ye most mighty ones grant to our children and their seed.
आदित्यासःसुमहसः कर्णोतन|	extended term of life that they may live long days.
यज्ञो हीळो वो अन्तर आदित्या अस्ति मर्ळत|	sacrifice o Ādityas is your inward monitor be kind.
युष्मे इद वो अपि षमसि सजात्ये|	for in the bond of kindred we are bound to you.
बर्हद वरूथं मरुतां देवं तरातारमश्विना|	the maruts high protecting aid the aśvins and the god who saves.
मित्रमीमहे वरुणं सवस्तये|	mitra and varuṇa for weal we supplicate.
अनेहो मित्रार्यमन नर्वद वरुण शंस्यम|	grant us a home with triple guard aryaman mitra varuṇa.
तरिवरूथं मरुतो यन्त नश्छर्दिः|	unthreatened maruts meet for praise and filled with men.
ये चिद धि मर्त्युबन्धव आदित्या मनवः समसि|	and as we human beings o Ādityas are akin to death.
पर सू नायुर्जीवसे तिरेतन|	graciously lengthen ye our lives that we may live.
मा चिदन्यद वि शंसत सखायो मा रिषण्यत|	glorify naught besides o friends so shall no sorrow trouble you.
इन्द्रमित्स्तोता वर्षणं सचा सुते मुहुरुक्था च शंसत|	praise only mighty indra when the juice is shed and say your lauds repeatedly.
अवक्रक्षिणं वर्षभं यथाजुरं गां न चर्षणीसहम|	even him eternal like a bull who rushes down mens conqueror bounteous like a cow.
विद्वेषणं संवननोभयंकरं मंहिष्ठमुभयाविनम|	him who is cause of both of enmity and peace to both sides most munificent.
यच्चिद धि तवा जना इमे नाना हवन्त ऊतये|	although these men in sundry ways invoke thee to obtain thine aid.
अस्माकं बरह्मेदमिन्द्र भूतु तेअह विश्वा च वर्धनम|	be this our prayer addressed o indra unto thee thine exaltation every day.
वि तर्तूर्यन्ते मघवन विपश्चितोअर्यो विपो जनानाम|	those skilled in song o maghavan among these men oercome with might the foemans songs.
उप करमस्व पुरुरूपमा भर वाजं नेदिष्ठमूतये|	come hither bring us strength in many a varied form most near that it may succour us.
महे चन तवामद्रिवः परा शुल्काय देयाम|	o caster of the stone i would not sell thee for a mighty price.
न सहस्रायनायुताय वज्रिवो न शताय शतामघ|	not for a thousand thunderer nor ten thousand nor a hundred lord of countless wealth.
वस्यानिन्द्रासि मे पितुरुत भरातुरभुञ्जतः|	o indra thou art more to me than sire or niggard brother is.
माता चमे छदयथः समा वसो वसुत्वनाय राधसे|	thou and my mother o good lord appear alike to give me wealth abundantly.
कवेयथ कवेदसि पुरुत्रा चिद धि ते मनः|	where art thou whither art thou gone for many a place attracts thy mind.
अलर्षि युध्म खजक्र्त पुरन्दर पर गायत्रा अगासिषुः|	haste warrior fortdestroyer lord of battles din haste holy songs have sounded forth.
परास्मै गायत्रमर्चत वावातुर्यः पुरन्दरः|	sing out the psalm to him who breaks down castles for his faithful friend.
याभिःकाण्वस्योप बर्हिरासदं यासद वज्री भिनत पुरः|	verses to bring the thunderer to destroy the forts and sit on kaṇvas sacred grass.
ये ते सन्ति दशग्विनः शतिनो ये सहस्रिणः|	the horses which are thine in tens in hundreds yea in thousands thine.
अश्वासो येते वर्षणो रघुद्रुवस्तेभिर्नस्तूयमा गहि|	even those vigorous steeds fleetfooted in the course with those come quickly near to us.
आ तवद्य सबर्दुघां हुवे गायत्रवेपसम|	this day i call sabardughā who animates the holy song.
इन्द्रं धेनुंसुदुघामन्यामिषमुरुधारामरंक्र्तम|	indra the richlyyielding milchcow who provides unfailing food in ample stream.
यत तुदत सूर एतशं वङकू वातस्य पर्णिना|	when sūra wounded etaśa with vātas rolling winged car.
वहत कुत्समार्जुनेयं शतक्रतुः तसरद गन्धर्वमस्त्र्तम|	indra bore kutsa Ārjuneya off and mocked gandharva the unconquered one.
य रते चिदभिश्रिषः पुरा जत्रुभ्य आत्र्दः|	he without ligature before making incision in the neck.
सन्धातासन्धिं मघवा पुरूवसुरिष्कर्ता विह्रुतं पुनः|	closed up the wound again most wealthy maghavan who maketh whole the injured part.
मा भूम निष्ट्या इवेन्द्र तवदरणा इव|	may we be never cast aside and strangers as it were to thee.
वनानि न परजहितान्यद्रिवो दुरोषासो अमन्महि|	we thunderwielding indra count ourselves as trees rejected and unfit to burn.
अमन्महीदनाशवोअनुग्रासश्च वर्त्रहन|	o vṛtraslayer we were thought slow and unready for the fray.
सक्र्त सु ते महता शूर राधसानु सतोमं मुदीमहि|	yet once in thy great bounty may we have delight o hero after praising thee.
यदि सतोमं मम शरवदस्माकमिन्द्रमिन्दवः|	if he will listen to my laud then may out somadrops that flow.
तिरः पवित्रं सस्र्वांस आशवो मन्दन्तु तुग्र्याव्र्धः|	rapidly through the strainer gladden indra drops due to the tugryas strengthener.
आ तवद्य सधस्तुतिं वावातुः सख्युरा गहि|	come now unto the common laud of thee and of thy faithful friend.
उपस्तुतिर्मघोनां पर तवावत्वधा ते वश्मि सुष्टुतिम|	so may our wealthy nobles praise give joy to thee fain would i sing thine eulogy.
सोता हि सोममद्रिभिरेमेनमप्सु धावत|	press out the soma with the stones and in the waters wash it clean.
गव्या वस्त्रेव वासयन्त इन नरो निर्धुक्षन वक्षणाभ्यः|	the men investing it with raiment made of milk shall milk it forth from out the stems.
अध जमो अध वा दिवो बर्हतो रोचनादधि|	whether thou come from earth or from the lustre of the lofty heaven.
अया वर्धस्व तन्वा गिरा ममा जाता सुक्रतो पर्ण|	wax stronger in thy body through my song of praise fill full all creatures o most wise.
इन्द्राय सु मदिन्तमं सोमं सोता वरेण्यम|	for india press the soma out most gladdening and most excellent.
शक्र एणं पीपयद विश्वया धिया हिन्वानं न वाजयुम|	may Śakra make it swell sent forth with every prayer and asking as it were for strength.
मा तवा सोमस्य गल्दया सदा याचन्नहं गिरा|	let me not still beseeching thee with earnest song at soma rites.
भूर्णिं मर्गं न सवनेषु चुक्रुधं क ईशानं न याचिषत|	anger thee like some wild beast who would not beseech him who hath power to grant his prayer.
मदेनेषितं मदमुग्रमुग्रेण शवसा|	the draught made swift with rapturous joy effectual with its mighty strength.
विश्वेषां तरुतारं मदच्युतं मदे हि षमा ददाति नः|	allconquering distilling transport let him drink for he in ecstasy gives us gifts.
शेवारे वार्या पुरु देवो मर्ताय दाशुषे|	where bliss is not may he allpraised god whom the pious glorify.
स सुन्वते चस्तुवते च रासते विश्वगूर्तो अरिष्टुतः|	bestow great wealth upon the mortal worshipper who sheds the juice and praises him.
एन्द्र याहि मत्स्व चित्रेण देव राधसा|	come indra and rejoice thyself o god in manifold affluence.
सरो न परास्युदरं सपीतिभिरा सोमेभिरुरु सफिरम|	thou fillest like a lake thy vast capacious bulk with soma and with draughts besides.
आ तवा सहस्रमा शतं युक्ता रथे हिरण्यये|	a thousand and a hundred steeds are harnessed to thy golden car.
बरह्मयुजो हरय इन्द्र केशिनो वहन्तु सोमपीतये|	so may the longmaned bays yoked by devotion bring indra to drink the soma juice.
आ तवा रथे हिरण्यये हरी मयूरशेप्या|	yoked to thy chariot wrought of gold may thy two bays with peacock tails.
शितिप्र्ष्ठा वहतां मध्वो अन्धसो विवक्षणस्य पीतये|	convey thee hither steeds with their white backs to quaff sweet juice that makes us eloquent.
पिबा तवस्य गिर्वणः सुतस्य पूर्वपा इव|	so drink thou lover of the song as the first drinker of this juice.
परिष्क्र्तस्य रसिन इयमासुतिश्चारुर्मदाय पत्यते|	this the outpouring of the savoury sap prepared is good and meet to gladden thee.
य एको अस्ति दंसना महानुग्रो अभि वरतैः|	he who alone by wondrous deed is mighty strong by holy works.
गमत स शिप्री न स योषदा गमद धवं न परि वर्जति|	may he come fair of cheek may he not stay afar but come and turn not from our call.
तवं पुरं चरिष्ण्वं वधैः शुष्णस्य सं पिणक|	Śuṣṇas quick moving castle thou hast crushed to pieces with thy bolts.
तवम्भा अनु चरो अध दविता यदिन्द्र हव्यो भुवः|	thou indra from of old hast followed after light since we have had thee to invoke.
मम तवा सूर उदिते मम मध्यन्दिने दिवः|	my praises when the sun hath risen my praises at the time of noon.
मम परपित्वेपिशर्वरे वसवा सतोमासो अव्र्त्सत|	my praises at the coming of the gloom of night o vasu have gone forth to thee.
सतुहि सतुहीदेते घा ते मंहिष्ठासो मघोनाम|	praise yea praise him of princes these are the most liberal of their gifts.
निन्दिताश्वः परपथी परमज्या मघस्य मेध्यातिथे|	these paramajyā ninditāśva prapathī most bounteous o medhyātithi.
आ यदश्वान वनन्वतः शरद्धयाहं रथे रुहम|	when to the car by faith i yoked the horses longing for the way.
उतवामस्य वसुनश्चिकेतति यो अस्ति याद्वः पशुः|	for skilled is yadus son in dealing precious wealth he who is rich in herds of kine.
य रज्रा मह्यं मामहे सह तवचा हिरण्यया|	may he who gave me two brown steeds together with their cloths of gold.
एष विश्वान्यभ्यस्तु सौभगासङगस्य सवनद्रथः|	may he Āsaṅgas son svanadratha obtain all joy and high felicities.
अध पलायोगिरति दासदन्यानासङगो अग्ने दशभिः सहस्रैः|	playogas son Āsaṅga by ten thousand o agni hath surpassed the rest in giving.
अधोक्षणो दश मह्यं रुशन्तो नळा इव सरसो निरतिष्ठन|	for me ten brighthued oxen have come forward like lotusstalks from out a lake upstanding.
अन्वस्य सथूरं दद्र्शे पुरस्तादनस्थ ऊरुरवरम्बमाणः|	what time her husbands perfect restoration to his lost strength and manhood was apparent.
शश्वती नार्यभिचक्ष्याह सुभद्रमर्य भोजनं बिभर्षि|	his consort Śaśvatī with joy addressed him now art thou well my lord and shalt be happy.
अग्निनेन्द्रेण वरुणेन विष्णुनादित्यै रुद्रैर्वसुभिः सचाभुवा|	with agni and with indra viṣṇu varuṇa with the Ādityas rudras vasus closely leagued.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं पिबतमश्विना|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins drink the soma juice.
विश्वाभिर्धीभिर्भुवनेन वाजिना दिवा पर्थिव्याद्रिभिः सचाभुवा|	with all the holy thoughts all being mighty ones in close alliance wil the mountains heaven and earth.
सजोषसा उषसा|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins drink the soma juice.
विश्वैर्देवैस्त्रिभिरेकादशैरिहाद्भिर्मरुद्भिर्भ्र्गुभिः सचाभुवा|	with all the deities three times eleven here in close alliance with the maruts bhṛgus floods.
सजोषसा उषसा|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins drink the soma juice.
जुषेथां यज्ञं बोधतं हवस्य मे विश्वेह देवौ सवनाव गछतम|	accept the sacrifice attend to this my call come nigh o ye twain gods to all libations here.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चेषं नो वोळ्हमश्विना|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins bring us strengthening food.
सतोमं जुषेथां युवशेव कन्यनां विश्वेह देवौ सवनाव गछतम|	accept our praisesong as a youth accepts a maid come nigh o ye twain gods to all libations here.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येन चेषं|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins bring us strengthening food.
गिरो जुषेथामध्वरं जुषेथां विश्वेह देवौ सवनाव गछतम|	accept the songs we sing accept the solemn rite come nigh o ye twain gods to all libations here.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चेषं|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins bring us strengthening food.
हारिद्रवेव पतथो वनेदुप सोमं सुतं महिषेवाव गछथः|	ye fly as starlings fly unto the forest trees like buffaloes ye seek the soma we have shed.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण च तरिर्वर्तिर्यातमश्विना|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn come thrice o aśvins to our home.
हंसाविव पतथो अध्वगाविव सोमं सुतं महिषेवाव गछथः|	ye fly like swans like those who travel on their way like buffaloes ye seek the soma we have shed.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण च तरिर|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn come thrice o aśvins to our home.
शयेनाविव पतथो हव्यदातये सोमं सुतं महिषेवाव गछथः|	ye fly to our oblation like a pair of hawks like buffaloes ye seek the soma we have shed.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण च तरिर|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn come thrice o aśvins to our home.
पिबतं च तर्प्णुतं चा च गछतं परजां च धत्तं दरविणं च धत्तम|	come hitherward and drink and satisfy yourselves bestow upon us progeny and affluence.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चोर्जं नो धत्तमश्विना|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins grant us vigorous strength.
जयतं च पर सतुतं च पर चावतं परजां च धत्तं दरविणं च धत्तम|	conquer your foes protect us praise your worshippers bestow upon us progeny and affluence.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चोर्जं|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins grant us vigorous strength.
हतं च शत्रून यततं च मित्रिणः परजां च धत्तं दरविणं च धत्तम|	slay enemies animate men whom ye befriend bestow upon us progeny and affluence.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चोर्जं|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn o aśvins grant us vigorous strength.
मित्रावरुणवन्ता उत धर्मवन्ता मरुत्वन्ता जरितुर्गछथो हवम|	with mitra varuṇa dharma and the maruts in your company approach unto your praisers call.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चादित्यैर्यातमश्विना|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn and with the Ādityas aśvins come.
अङगिरस्वन्ता उत विष्णुवन्ता मरुत्वन्ता जरितुर्गछथो हवम|	with viṣṇu and the aṅgirases attending you and with the maruts come unto your praisers call.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चादित्यैर|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn and with the Ādityas aśvins come.
रभुमन्ता वर्षणा वाजवन्ता मरुत्वन्ता जरितुर्गछथो हवम|	with Ṛbhus and with vājas o ye mighty ones leagued with the maruts come ye to your praisers call.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चादित्यैर|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn and with the Ādityas aśvins come.
बरह्म जिन्वतमुत जिन्वतं धियो हतं रक्षांसि सेधतममीवाः|	give spirit to our prayer and animate our thoughts slay ye the rākṣasas and drive away disease.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं सुन्वतो अश्विना|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn the pressers soma aśvins drink.
कषत्रं जिन्वतमुत जिन्वतं नॄन हतं रक्षाण्सि सेधतममीवाः|	strengthen the ruling power strengthen the men of war slay ye the rākṣasas and drive away disease.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn the pressers soma aśvins drink.
धेनूर्जिन्वतमुत जिन्वतं विशो हतं रक्षांसि सेधतममीवाः|	give strength unto the milchkine give the people strength slay ye the rākṣasas and drive away disease.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn the pressers soma aśvins drink.
अत्रेरिव शर्णुतं पूर्व्यस्तुतिं शयावाश्वस्य सुन्वतो मदच्युता|	as ye heard atris earliest eulogy so hear Śyāvāśva somapresser ye who reel in joy.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येन चाश्विना तिरोह्न्यम|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn drink juice o aśvins three days old.
सर्गानिव सर्जतं सुष्टुतीरुप शयावाश्वस्य सुन्वतो मदच्युता|	further like running streams Śyāvāśvas eulogies who presses out the soma ye who reel in joy.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चाश्विना|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn drink juice o aśvins three days old.
रश्मीन्रिव यछतमध्वरानुप शयावाश्वस्य सुन्वतो मदच्युता|	seize as ye grasp the reins Śyāvāśvas solemn rites who presses out the soma ye who reel in joy.
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चाश्विना|	accordant of one mind with sūrya and with dawn drink juice o aśvins three days old.
अर्वाग रथं नि यछतं पिबतं सोम्यं मधु|	drive down your chariot hitherward drink ye the somas savoury juice.
आ यातमश्विना गतमवस्युर्वामहं हुवे धत्तं रत्नानि दाशुषे|	approach ye aśvins come to us i call you eager for your aid grant treasures to the worshipper.
नमोवाके परस्थिते अध्वरे नरा विवक्षणस्य पीतये|	when sacrifice which tells our reverence hath begun heroes to drink the gushing juice.
आ यातं|	approach ye aśvins come to us i call you eager for your aid grant treasures to the worshipper.
सवाहाक्र्तस्य तर्म्पतं सुतस्य देवावन्धसः|	sate you with consecrated drink with juice effused ye deities.
आ यातं|	approach ye aśvins come to us i call you eager for your aid grant treasures to the worshipper.
अग्निरुक्थे पुरोहितो गरावाणो बर्हिरध्वरे|	cheif priest is agni at the laud as stones and grass at sacrifice.
रचा यामि मरुतो बरह्मणस पतिं देवानवो वरेण्यम|	with song i seek the maruts brahmaṇaspati gods for help much to be desired.
आ पशुं गासि पर्थिवीं वनस्पतीनुषासा नक्तमोषधीः|	i sing to cattle and to earth to trees to dawns to night to plants.
विश्वे च नो वसवो विश्ववेदसो धीनां भूत परावितारः|	o all ye vasus ye possessors of all wealth be ye the furtherers of our thoughts.
पर सू न एत्वध्वरोअग्ना देवेषु पूर्व्यः|	forth go with agni to the gods our sacrifice of ancient use.
आदित्येषु पर वरुणे धर्तव्रते मरुत्सु विश्वभानुषु|	to the Ādityas varuṇa whose law stands fast and the alllightening marut troop.
विश्वे हि षमा मनवे विश्ववेदसो भुवन वर्धे रिशादसः|	lords of all wealth may they be strengtheners of man destroyers of his enemies.
अरिष्टेभिः पायुभिर्विश्ववेदसो यन्ता नोअव्र्कं छर्दिः|	lords of all wealth do ye with guards which none may harm preserve our dwelling free from foes.
आ नो अद्य समनसो गन्ता विश्वे सजोषसः|	come to us with one mind today come to us all with one accord.
रचा गिरा मरुतो देव्यदिते सदने पस्त्ये महि|	maruts with holy song and goddess aditi mighty one to our house and home.
अभि परिया मरुतो या वो अश्व्या हव्या मित्र परयाथन|	send us delightful things ye maruts on your steeds come ye o mitra to our gifts.
आबर्हिरिन्द्रो वरुणस्तुरा नर आदित्यासो सदन्तु नः|	let indra varuṇa and the Ādityas sit swift heroes on our sacred grass.
वयं वो वर्क्तबर्हिषो हितप्रयस आनुषक|	we who have trimmed the grass for you and set the banquet in array.
सुतसोमासो वरुण हवामहे मनुष्वदिद्धाग्नयः|	and pressed the soma call you varuina like men with sacrificial fires aflame.
आ पर यात मरुतो विष्णो अश्विना पूषन माकीनया धिया|	o maruts visinu aśvins pūṣan haste away with minds turned hitherward to me.
इन्द्र आ यातु परथमः सनिष्युभिर्व्र्षा यो वर्त्रहा गर्णे|	let the strong indra famed as vṛtras slayer come first with the winners of the spoil.
वि नो देवासो अद्रुहोअछिद्रं शर्म यछत|	ye guileless gods bestow on us a refuge strong on every side.
न यद दूराद वसवो नू चिदन्तितो वरूथमादधर्षति|	a sure protection vasus unassailable from near at hand or from afar.
अस्ति हि वः सजात्यं रिशादसो देवासो अस्त्याप्यम|	kinship have i with you and close alliance o ye gods destroyers of our foes.
पर णः पूर्वस्मै सुविताय वोचत मक्षू सुम्नाय नव्यसे|	call us to our prosperity of former days and soon to new klicity.
इदा हि व उपस्तुतिमिदा वामस्य भक्तये|	for now have i sent forth to you that i may win a fair reward.
उप वो विश्ववेदसो नमस्युरानस्र्क्ष्यन्यामिव|	lords of all wealth with homage this my song of praise like a milchcow that faileth not.
उदु षय वः सविता सुप्रणीतयोअस्थादूर्ध्वो वरेण्यः|	excellent savitar hath mounted up on high for you ye sure and careful guides.
नि दविपादश्चतुष्पादो अर्थिनोअविश्रन पतयिष्णवः|	bipeds and quadrupeds with several hopes and aims and birds have settled to their tasks.
देवंदेवं वोअवसे देवंदेवमभिष्टये|	singing their praise with godlike thought let us invoke each god for grace.
देवंदेवं हुवेम वाजसातये गर्णन्तो देव्या धिया|	each god to bring you help each god to strengthen you.
देवासो हि षमा मनवे समन्यवो विश्वे साकं सरातयः|	for of one spirit are the gods with mortal man cosharers all of gracious gifts.
ते नो अद्य ते अपरं तुचे तु नो भवन्तु वरिवोविदः|	may they increase our strength hereafter and today providing case and ample room.
पर वः शंसाम्यद्रुहः संस्थ उपस्तुतीनाम|	i laud you o ye guileless gods here where we meet to render praise.
न तं धूर्तिर्वरुण मित्र मर्त्यं यो वो धामभ्योअविधत|	none varuṇa and mitra harins the mortal man who honours and obeys your laws.
पर स कषयं तिरते वि महीरिषो यो वो वराय दाशति|	he makes his house endure he gathers plenteous food who pays obedience to your will.
पर परजाभिर्जायते धर्मणस पर्यरिष्टः सर्व एधते|	born in his sons anew he spreads as law commands and prospers every way unharmed.
रते स विन्दते युधः सुगेभिर्यात्यध्वनः|	een without war he gathers wealth and goes hisway on pleasant paths.
अर्यमा मित्रोवरुणः सरातयो यं तरायन्ते सजोषसः|	whom mitra varuṇa and aryaman protect sharing the giftof one accord.
अज्रे चिदस्मै कर्णुथा नयञ्चनं दुर्गे चिदा सुसरणम|	een on the plain for him ye make a sloping path an easy way where road is none.
एषा चिदस्मादशनिः परो नु सास्रेधन्ती वि नश्यतु|	and far away from him the ineffectual shaft must vanish shot at him in vain.
यदद्य सूर्य उद्यति परियक्षत्रा रतं दध|	if ye appoint the rite today kind rulers when the sun ascends.
यन निम्रुचि परबुधि विश्ववेदसो यद वा मध्यन्दिने दिवः|	lords of all wealth at sunset or at wakingtime or be it at the noon of day.
यद वाभिपित्वे असुरा रतं यते छर्दिर्येम वि दाशुषे|	or asuras when ye have sheltered the worshipper who goes to sacrifice at eve.
वयं तद वो वसवो विश्ववेदस उप सथेयाम मध्य आ|	may we o vasus ye possessors of all wealth come then into the midst of you.
यदद्य सूर उदिते यन मध्यन्दिन आतुचि|	if ye today at sunrise or at noon or in the gloom of eve.
वामं धत्थ मनवे विश्ववेदसो जुह्वानाय परचेतसे|	lords of all riches give fair treasure to the man the wise man who hath sacrificed.
वयं तद वः सम्राज आ वर्णीमहे पुत्रो न बहुपाय्यम|	then we imperial rulers claim of you this boon your wide protection as a son.
अश्याम तदादित्या जुह्वतो हविर्येन वस्योअनशामहै|	may we Ādityas offering holy gifts obtain that which shall bring us greater bliss.
समिधाग्निं दुवस्यत घर्तैर्बोधयतातिथिम|	pay service unto agni with your fuel rouse your guest with oil.
आस्मिन हव्याजुहोतन|	in him present your offerings.
अग्ने सतोमं जुषस्व मे वर्धस्वानेन मन्मना|	agni do thou accept my laud be magnified by this my song.
परति सूक्तानि हर्य नः|	welcome my sweetlyspoken words.
अग्निं दूतं पुरो दधे हव्यवाहमुप बरुवे|	agni envoy i place in front the oblationbearer i address.
देवाना सादयादिह|	here let him seat the deities.
उत ते बर्हन्तो अर्चयः समिधानस्य दीदिवः|	agni the lofty flames of thee enkindled have gone up on high.
अग्ने शुक्रासीरते|	thy bright flames thou refulgent one.
उप तवा जुह्वो मम घर्ताचीर्यन्तु हर्यत|	beloved let my ladles full of sacred oil come near to thee.
अग्ने हव्या जुषस्व नः|	agni accept our offerings.
मन्द्रं होतारं रत्विजं चित्रभानुं विभावसुम|	i worship agnimay he hearthe cheerful the invoker priest.
अग्निमीळे स उ शरवत|	of varied splendour rich in light.
परत्नं होतारमीड्यं जुष्टमग्निं कविक्रतुम|	ancient invoker meet for praise beloved agni wise and strong.
अध्वराणामभिश्रियम|	the visitant of solemn rites.
जुषानो अङगिरस्तमेमा हव्यान्यानुषक|	agni best aṅgiras accept straightway these offerings and guide.
अग्ने यज्ञं नयर्तुथा|	the seasonable sacrifice.
समिधान उ सन्त्य शुक्रशोच इहा वह|	excellent god with brilliant flames enkindled bring thou hitherward.
चिकित्वान दैव्यं जनम|	knowing the way the heavenly host.
विप्रं होतारमद्रुहं धूमकेतुं विभावसुम|	him sage and herald void of guile ensign of sacrifices him.
यज्ञानां केतुमीमहे|	smokebannered rich in light we seek.
अग्ने नि पाहि नस्त्वं परति षम देव रीषतः|	o agni be our guardian thou god against those who injure us.
भिन्धि दवेषः सहस्क्र्त|	destroy our foes thou son of strength.
अग्निः परत्नेन मन्मना शुम्भानस्तन्वं सवाम|	making his body beautiful agni the sage hath waxen by.
कविर्विप्रेण वाव्र्धे|	the singer and his ancient hymn.
ऊर्जो नपातमा हुवेअग्निं पावकशोचिषम|	i invocate the child of strength agni with purifying flame.
अस्मिन यज्ञे सवध्वरे|	at this wellordered sacrifice.
स नो मित्रमहस्त्वमग्ने शुक्रेण सोचिषा|	so agni rich in many friends with fiery splendour seat thyself.
देवैरा सत्सिबर्हिषि|	with gods upon our sacred grass.
यो अग्निं तन्वो दमे देवं मर्तः सपर्यति|	the mortal man who serves the god agni within his own abode.
तस्मा इद दीदयद वसु|	for him he causes wealth to shine.
अग्निर्मूर्धा दिवः ककुत पतिः पर्थिव्या अयम|	agni is head and height of heaven the master of the earth is he.
अपां रेतांसि जिन्वति|	he quickeneth the waters seed.
उदग्ने शुचयस्तव शुक्रा भराजन्त ईरते|	upward o agni rise thy flames pure and resplendent blazing high.
तव जयोतींष्यर्चयः|	thy lustres fair effulgences.
ईषिषे वार्यस्य हि दात्रस्याग्ने सवर्पतिः|	for agni thou as lord of light rulest oer choicest gifts may i.
सतोता सयां तव शर्मणि|	thy singer find defence in thee.
तवामग्ने मनीषिणस्त्वां हिन्वन्ति चित्तिभिः|	o agni they who understand stir thee to action with their thoughts.
तवां वर्धन्तु नो गिरः|	so let our songs enhance thy might.
अदब्धस्य सवधावतो दूतस्य रेभतः सदा|	we ever claim the friendship of agni the singing messenger.
अग्नेः सख्यं वर्णीमहे|	of godlike nature void of guile.
अग्निः शुचिव्रततमः शुचिर्विप्रः शुचिः कविः|	agni who bears most holy sway the holy singer holy sage.
शुचीरोचत आहुतः|	shines holy when we worship him.
उत तवा धीतयो मम गिरो वर्धन्तु विश्वहा|	yea let my meditations let my songs exalt thee evermore.
अग्ने सख्यस्य बोधि नः|	think agni of our friendly bond.
यदग्ने सयामहं तवं तवं वा घा सया अहम|	if i were thou and thou wert i o agni every prayer of thine.
सयुष टे सत्या इहाशिषः|	should have its due fulfilment here.
वसुर्वसुपतिर्हि कमस्यग्ने विभावसुः|	for excellent and lord of wealth art thou o agni rich in light.
सयाम ते सुमतावपि|	may we enjoy thy favouring grace.
अग्ने धर्तव्रताय ते समुद्रायेव सिन्धवः|	agni to thee whose laws stand fast our resonant songs of praise speed forth.
गिरो वाश्रासीरते|	as rivers hasten to the sea.
युवानं विश्पतिं कविं विश्वादं पुरुवेपसम|	agni the youthful lord of men who stirreth much and eateth all.
अग्निं शुम्भामि मन्मभिः|	the sage i glorify with hymns.
यज्ञानां रथ्ये वयं तिग्मजम्भाय वीळवे|	to agni let us haste with lauds the guide of sacrificial rites.
सतोमैरिषेमाग्नये|	armed with sharp teeth the mighty one.
अयमग्ने तवे अपि जरिता भूतु सन्त्य|	and let this man good agni be with thee the singer of thy praise.
तस्मै पावक मर्ळय|	be gracious holy one to him.
धीरो हयस्यद्मसद विप्रो न जाग्र्विः सदा|	for thou art sharer of our feast wise ever watchful as a sage.
अग्ने दीदयसि दयवि|	agni thou shinest in the sky.
पुराग्ने दुरितेभ्यः पुरा मर्ध्रेभ्यः कवे|	o agni sage before our foes before misfortunes fall on us.
पर ण आयुर्वसो तिर|	excellent lord prolong our lives.
युवोरु षू रथं हुवे सधस्तुत्याय सुरिषु|	i call your chariot to receive united praise mid princely men.
अतुर्तदक्षाव्र्षणा वर्षण्वसू|	strong gods who pour down wealth of never vanquished might.
युवं वरो सुषाम्णे महे तने नासत्या|	ye to varosusaman come nāsatyas for this glorious rite.
अवोभिर्यथो वर्षण वर्षण्वसू|	with your protecting aid strong gods who pour down wealth.
ता वामद्य हवामहे हव्येभिर्वजिनीवसू|	so with oblations we invoke you rich in ample wealth today.
पूर्वीरिष इषयन्तावति कषपः|	when night hath passed o ye who send us plenteous food.
आ वां वाहिष्ठो अश्विना रथो यातु शरुतो नर|	o aśvins heroes let your car famed best to travel come to us.
उप सतोमान तुरस्य दर्शथः शरिये|	and for his glory mark your zealous servants lauds.
जुहुराणा चिदश्विना मन्येथां वर्षण्वसू|	aśvins who send us precious gifts even when offended think of him.
युवं हि रुद्रा पर्षथो अति दविषः|	for ye o rudras lead us safe beyond our foes.
दस्रा हि विश्वमानुषं मक्षूभिः परिदीयथः|	for wonderworkers with fleet steeds ye fly completely round this all.
धियंजिन्वा मधुवर्णा शुभस पती|	stirring our thoughts ye lords of splendour honeyhued.
उप नो यातमश्विना राया विश्वपुषा सह|	with allsustaining opulence aśvins come hitherward to us.
मघवाना सुवीरावनपच्युता|	ye rich and noble heroes neer to be oerthrown.
आ मे अस्य परतीव्यमिन्द्रनासत्या गतम|	to welcome this mine offering o ye indralike nāsatyas come.
देवा देवेभिरद्य सचनस्तमा|	as gods of best accord this day with other gods.
वयं हि वां हवामह उक्षण्यन्तो वयश्ववत|	for we like vyaśva lifting up our voice like oxen call on you.
सुमतिभिरुप विप्राविहा गतम|	with all your loving kindness sages come to us.
अश्विना सव रषे सतुहि कुवित ते शरवतो हवम|	o Ṛṣi laud the aśvins well will they not listen to thy call.
नेदीयसः कूळयातः पणीन्रुत|	will they not burn the paṇis who are nearer them.
वैयश्वस्य शरुतं नरोतो मे अस्य वेदथः|	o heroes listen to the son of vyaśva and regard me here.
सजोषसा वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	varuṇa mitra aryaman of one accord.
युवादत्तस्य धिष्ण्या युवानीतस्य सूरिभिः|	gods whom we yearn for of your gifts of what ye bring to us bestow.
अहरअहर्व्र्षण मह्यं शिक्षतम|	by princes hands on me ye mighty day by day.
यो वां यज्ञेभिराव्र्तोअधिवस्त्र वधूरिव|	him whom your sacrifices clothe even as a woman with her robe.
सपर्यन्त शुभे चक्राते अश्विना|	the aśvins help to glory honouring him well.
यो वामुरुव्यचस्तमं चिकेतति नर्पाय्यम|	whoso regards your care of men as succour widest in its reach.
वर्तिरश्विना परि यातमस्मयू|	about his dwelling go ye aśvins loving us.
अस्मभ्यं सु वर्षण्वसू यातं वर्तिर्न्र्पय्यम|	come to us ye who pour down wealth come to the home which men must guard.
विषुद्रुहेव यज्ञमूहथुर्गिरा|	like shafts ye are made meet for sacrifice by song.
वाहिष्ठो वां हवानां सतोमो दूतो हुवन नरा|	most fetching of all calls the laud as envoy heroes called to you.
युवाभ्यां भूत्वश्विना|	be it your own o aśvin pair.
यददो दिवो अर्णव इषो व मदथो गर्हे|	be ye in yonder sea of heaven or joying in the home of food.
शरुतमिन मे अमर्त्या|	listen to me immortal ones.
उत सया शवेतयावरी वाहिष्ठा वां नदीनाम|	this river with his lucid flow attracts you more than all the streams.
सिन्धुर्हिरण्यवर्तनिः|	even sindhu with his path of gold.
समदेतय सुकीर्त्याश्विना शवेतया धिया|	o aśvins with that glorious fame come hither through our brilliant song.
वहेथे शुभ्रयावाना|	come ye whose ways are marked with light.
युक्ष्वा हि तवं रथासहा युवस्व पोष्या वसो|	harness the steeds who draw the car o vasu bring the wellfed pair.
आन नो वायो मधु पिबास्माकं सवना गहि|	o vāyu drink thou of our meath come unto our drinkofferings.
तव वायव रतस्पते तवष्टुर्जामातरद्भुत|	wonderful vāyu lord of right thou who art tvaṣṭars soninlaw.
अवांस्या वर्णीमहे|	thy saving succour we elect.
तवष्टुर्जामातरं वयमीशानं राय ईमहे|	to tvaṣṭars soninlaw we pray for wealth whereof he hath control.
सुतावन्तो वयुं दयुम्ना जनासः|	for glory we seek vayu men with juice effused.
वायो याहि शिवा दिवो वहस्व सु सवश्व्यम|	from heaven auspicious vāyu come drive hither with thy noble steeds.
वहस्व महःप्र्थुपक्षसा रथे|	come on thy mighty car with wideextending seat.
तवां हि सुप्सरस्तमं नर्षदनेषु हूमहे|	we call thee to the homes of men thee wealthiest in noble food.
गरावाणं नाश्वप्र्ष्ठं मंहना|	and liberal as a pressstone with a horses back.
स तवं नो देव मनसा वायो मन्दानो अग्रियः|	so glad and joyful in thine heart do thou god vāyu first of all.
कर्धि वाजानपो धियः|	vouchsafe us water strength and thought.
आ याहि सुषुमा हि त इन्द्र सोमं पिबा इमम|	come we have pressed the juice for thee o indra drink this soma here.
एदं बर्हिः सदो मम|	sit thou on this my sacred grass.
आ तवा बरह्मयुजा हरी वहतामिन्द्र केशिना|	o indra let thy longmaned bays yoked by prayer bring thee hitherward.
उप बरह्मणि नः शर्णु|	give car and listen to our prayers.
बरह्माणस्त्वा वयं युजा सोमपामिन्द्र सोमिनः|	we somabearing brahmans call thee somadrinker with thy friend.
सुतावन्तो हवामहे|	we indra bringing soma juice.
आ नो याहि सुतावतोअस्माकं सुष्टुतीरुप|	come unto us who bring the juice come unto this our eulogy.
पिबा सु शिप्रिन्नन्धसः|	fairvisored drink thou of the juice.
आ ते सिञ्चामि कुक्ष्योरनु गात्रा वि धावतु|	i pour it down within thee so through all thy members let it spread.
गर्भाय जिह्वया मधु|	take with thy tongue the pleasant drink.
सवादुष टे अस्तु संसुदे मधुमान तन्वे तव|	sweet to thy body let it be delicious be the savoury juice.
सोमः शमस्तु ते हर्दे|	sweet be the soma to thine heart.
अयमु तवा विचर्षणे जनीरिवाभि संव्र्तः|	like women let this somadraught invested with its robe approach.
पर सोम इन्द्र सर्पतु|	o active indra close to thee.
तुविग्रीवो वपोदरः सुबाहुरन्धसो मदे|	indra transported with the juice vast in his bulk strong in his neck.
इन्द्रो वर्त्राणि जिघ्नते|	and stout arms smites the vṛtras down.
इन्द्र परेहि पुरस्त्वं विश्वस्येशान ओजसा|	o indra go thou forward thou who rulest over all by might.
वर्त्राणि वर्त्रहञ जहि|	thou vṛtraslayer slay the fiends.
दीर्घस्ते अस्त्वङकुशो येना वसु परयछसि|	long be thy graspinghook wherewith thou givest ample wealth to him.
यजमानाय सुन्वते|	who sheds the juice and worships thee.
अयं त इन्द्र सोमो निपूतो अधि बर्हिषि|	here indra is thy somadraught made pure upon the sacred grass.
एहीमस्य दरवापिब|	run hither come and drink thereof.
शाचिगो शाचिपूजनायं रणाय ते सुतः|	famed for thy radiance worshipped well this juice is shed for thy delight.
आखण्डल पर हूयसे|	thou art invoked akhandala.
यस्ते शर्ङगव्र्षो नपात परणपात कुण्डपाय्यः|	to kundapayya grandsons son grandson of srngavrs to thee.
नयस्मिन दध्र आ मनः|	to him have i addressed my thought.
वास्तोष पते धरुवा सथूणांसत्रं सोम्यानाम|	strong pillar thou lord of the home armour of somaofferers.
दरप्सो भेत्ता पुरां शश्वतीनामिन्द्रो मुनीनां सखा|	the drop of soma breaketh all the strongholds down and indra is the Ṛṣis friend.
पर्दाकुसानुर्यजतो गवेषण एकः सन्नभि भूयसः|	holy prdikusanu winner of the spoil one eminent oer many men.
भूर्णिमश्वं नयत तुजा पुरो गर्भेन्द्रं सोमस्य पीतये|	lead on the wild horse indra with his vigorous grasp forward to drink the soma juice.
दूरादिहेव यत सत्यरुणप्सुरशिश्वितत|	when even as she were present here red dawn hath shone from far away.
वि भानुं विश्वधातनत|	she spreadeth light on every side.
नर्वद दस्रा मनोयुजा रथेन पर्थुपाजसा|	like heroes on your willyoked car farshining wonderworkers ye.
सचेथे अश्विनोषसम|	attend o aśvins on the dawn.
युवाभ्यां वाजिनीवसू परति सतोम अद्र्क्षत|	by you o lords of ample wealth our songs of praise have been observed.
वाचं दूतोयथोहिषे|	as envoy have i brought the prayer.
पुरुप्रिया ण ऊतये पुरुमन्द्रा पुरूवसू|	kaṇvas must praise the aśvins dear to many making many glad.
सतुषे कण्वासोश्विना|	most rich that they may succour us.
मंहिष्ठा वाजसातमेषयन्ता शुभस पती|	most liberal best at winning strength inciters lords of splendour who.
गन्तारा दाशुषो गर्हम|	visit the worshippers abode.
ता सुदेवाय दाशुषे सुमेधामवितारिणीम|	so for devout sudeva dew with fatness his unfailing mead.
घर्तैर्गव्यूतिमुक्षतम|	and make it rich for sacrifice.
आ न सतोममुप दरवत तूयं शयेनेभिराशुभिः|	hitherward running speedily with horses as with rapid hawks.
यातमश्वेभिरश्विना|	come aśvins to our song of praise.
येभिस्तिस्रः परावतो दिवो विश्वानि रोचना|	wherewith the three wide distances and all the lights that are in heaven.
तरीन्रक्तून परिदीयथः|	ye traverse and three times of night.
उत नो गोमतीरिष उत सातीरहर्विदा|	o finders of the day that we may win us food of kine and wealth.
वि पथः सातये सितम|	open the paths for us to tread.
आ नो गोमन्तमश्विना सुवीरं सुरथं रयिम|	o aśvins bring us wealth in kine in noble heroes and in cars.
वोळ्हमश्वावतीरिषः|	bring us the strength that horses give.
वाव्र्धाना शुभस पती दस्रा हिरण्यवर्तनी|	ye lords of splendour glorified ye wonderworkers borne on paths.
पिबतं सोम्यं मधु|	of gold drink sweets with somajuice.
अस्मभ्यं वाजिनीवसू मघवद्भ्यश्च सप्रथः|	to us ye lords of ample wealth and to our wealth chiefs extend.
छर्दिर्यन्तमदाभ्यम|	wide shelter neer to be assailed.
नि षु बरह्म जनानां याविष्टं तूयमा गतम|	come quickly downward to the prayer of people whom ye favour most.
मो षवन्यानुपारतम|	approach not unto other folk.
अस्य पिबतमश्विना युवं मदस्य चारुणः|	ye aśvins whom our minds perceive drink of this lovely gladdening draught.
मध्वो रातस्यधिष्ण्या|	the mcath which we present to you.
अस्मे आ वहतं रयिं शतवन्तं सहस्रिणम|	bring riches hither unto us in hundreds and in thousands source.
पुरुक्षुं विश्वधायसम|	of plenteous food sustaining all.
पुरुत्रा चिद धि वां नरा विह्वयन्ते मनीषिणः|	verily sages call on you ye heroes in full many a place.
वाघद्भिरश्विना गतम|	moved by the priests o aśvins conic.
जनासो वर्क्तबर्हिषो हविष्मन्तो अरंक्र्तः|	men who have trimmed the sacred grass bringing oblations and prepared.
युवां हवन्ते अश्विना|	o aśvins are invoking you.
अस्माकमद्य वामयं सतोमो वाहिष्ठो अन्तमः|	may this our hymn of praise today most powerful to bring you be.
युवाभ्यां भूत्वश्विना|	o aśvins nearest to your hearts.
यो ह वां मधुनो दर्तिराहितो रथचर्षणे|	the skin filled full of savoury meath laid in the pathway of your car.
ततः पिबतमश्विना|	o aśvins drink ye both therefrom.
तेन नो वाजिनीवसू पश्वे तोकाय शं गवे|	for this ye lords of ample wealth bring blessing for our herd our kine.
वहतं पीवरीरिषः|	our progeny and plenteous food.
उत नो दिव्या इष उत सिन्धून्रहर्विदा|	ye too unclose to us like doors the strengthening waters of the sky.
अप दवारेव वर्षथः|	and rivers ye who find the day.
कदा वां तौग्र्यो विधत समुद्रे जहितो नरा|	when did the son of tugra serve you men abandoned in the sea.
यद वां रथो विभिष पतात|	that with winged steeds your car might fly.
युवं कण्वाय नासत्यापिरिप्ताय हर्म्ये|	ye o nāsatyas ministered to kaṇva with repeated aid.
शश्वदूतीर्दशस्यथः|	when cast into the heated pit.
ताभिरा यातमूतिभिर्नव्यसीभिः सुशस्तिभिः|	come near with those most recent aids of yours which merit eulogy.
यद वां वर्षण्वसू हुवे|	when i invoke you wealthy gods.
यथा चित कण्वमावतं परियमेधमुपस्तुतम|	as ye protected kaṇva erst priyamedha and upastuta.
अत्रिं शिञ्जारमश्विना|	atri sinjara aśvins twain.
यथोत कर्त्व्ये धनेअंशुं गोष्वगस्त्यम|	and amsu in decisive fight agastya in the fray for kine.
यथा वाजेषु सोभरिम|	and in his battles sobhari.
एतावद वां वर्षण्वसू अतो वा भूयो अश्विना|	for so much bliss or even more o aśvins wealthy gods than this.
गर्णन्तः सुम्नमीमहे|	we pray white singing hymns to you.
रथं हिरण्यवन्धुरं हिरण्याभीशुमश्विना|	ascend your car with golden seat o aśvins and with reins of gold.
आ हि सथाथो दिविस्प्र्शम|	that reaches even to the sky.
हिरण्ययी वां रभिरीषा अक्षो हिरण्ययः|	golden is its supporting shaft the axle also is of gold.
उभा चक्रा हिरण्यया|	and both the wheels are made of gold.
तेन नो वाजिनीवसू परावतश्चिदा गतम|	thereon ye lords of ample wealth come to us even from afar.
उपेमां सुष्टुतिं मम|	come ye to this mine eulogy.
आ वहेथे पराकात पूर्वीरश्नन्तावश्विना|	from far away ye come to us aśvins enjoying plenteous food.
इषो दासीरमर्त्या|	of dāsas o immortal ones.
आ नो दयुम्नैरा शरवोभिरा राया यातमश्विना|	with splendour riches and renown o aśvins hither come to us.
पुरुश्चन्द्रा नासत्या|	nāsatyas shining brilliantly.
एह वां परुषितप्सवो वयो वहन्तु पर्णिनः|	may dappled horses steeds who fly with pinions bring you hitherward.
अछा सवध्वरं जनम|	to people skilled in sacrifice.
रथं वामनुगायसं य इषा वर्तते सह|	the whcel delayeth not that car of yours accompanied by song.
न चक्रमभि बाधते|	that cometh with a store of food.
हिरण्ययेन रथेन दरवत्पाणिभिरश्वैः|	borne on that chariot wrought of gold with coursers very fleet of foot.
धीजवना नासत्या|	come o nāsatyas swift as thought.
युवं मर्गं जाग्र्वांसं सवदथो वा वर्षण्वसू|	o wealthy gods ye taste and find the brisk and watchful wild beast good.
ता नःप्र्ङकतमिषा रयिम|	associate wealth with food for us.
ता मे अश्विना सनीनां विद्यातं नवानाम|	as such o aśvins find for me my share of newpresented gifts.
यथा चिच्चैद्यः कशुः शतमुष्ट्रानां ददत सहस्रा दश गोनाम|	as kasu cedis son gave me a hundred head of buffaloes and ten thousand kine.
यो मे हिरण्यसन्द्र्शो दश राज्ञो अमंहत|	he who hath given me for mine own ten kings like gold to look upon.
अधस्पदा इच्चैद्यस्य कर्ष्टयश्चर्मम्ना अभितो जनाः|	at caidyas feet are all the people round about all those who think upon the shield.
माकिरेना पथा गाद येनेमे यन्ति चेदयः|	no man not any goes upon the path on which the cedis walk.
अन्यो नेत सूरिरोहते भूरिदावत्तरो जनः|	no other prince no folk is held more liberal of gifts than they.
ओ तयमह्व आ रथमद्या दंसिष्ठमूतये|	hitherward have i called today for succour that most wondrous car.
यमश्विना सुहवा रुद्रवर्तनी आ सूर्यायै तस्थथुः|	which ye ascended aśvins ye whose paths are red swift to give car for sūryas sake.
पूर्वायुषं सुहवं पुरुस्प्र्हं भुज्युं वाजेषु पूर्व्यम|	car ever young much longedfor easily invoked soon guided first in deeds of might.
सचनावन्तं सुमतिभिः सोभरे विद्वेषसमनेहसम|	which waits and serves o sobhari with benevolence without a rival or a foe.
इह तया पुरुभूतमा देवा नमोभिरश्विना|	these aśvins with our homage these two omnipresent deities.
अर्वाचीना सववसे करामहे गन्तारा दशुषो गर्हम|	hitherward will we bring for kind help these who seek the dwelling of the worshipper.
युवो रथस्य परि चक्रमीयत ईर्मान्यद वामिषण्यति|	one of your chariot wheels is moving swiftly round one speeds for you its onward course.
अस्मानछा सुमतिर्वां शुभस पती आ धेनुरिव धावतु|	like a milchcow o lords of splendour and with haste let your benevolence come to us.
रथो यो वां तरिवन्धुरो हिरण्यभीशुरश्विना|	that chariot of yours which hath a triple seat and reins of gold.
परि दयावाप्र्थिवी भूषति शरुतस्तेन नासत्या गतम|	the famous car that traverseth the heaven and earth thereon nāsatyas aśvins come.
दशस्यन्ता मनवे पूर्व्यं दिवि यवं वर्केण कर्षथः|	ye with your plough when favouring manu with your help ploughed the first harvest in the sky.
ता वामद्य सुमतिभिः शुभस पती अश्विना पर सतुवीमहि|	as such will we exalt you lords of splendour now o aśvins with our prayer and praise.
उप नो वजिनीवसू यातं रतस्य पथिभिः|	come to us lords of ample wealth by paths of everlasting law.
येभिस्त्र्क्षिं वर्षणा तरसदस्यवं महे कषत्राय जिन्वथः|	whereby to high dominion ye with mighty strength raised trksi trasadasyus son.
अयं वामद्रिभिः सुतः सोमो नर वर्षण्वसु|	this soma pressed with stones is yours ye heroes lords of plenteous wealth.
आ यातं सोमपीतये पिबतं दाशुषो गर्हे|	approach to drink the soma come drink in the worshippers abode.
आ हि रुहतमश्विना रथे कोशे हिरण्यये वर्षण्वसू|	o aśvins mount the chariot mount the golden seat ye who are lords of plenteous wealth.
युञ्जाथां पीवरीरिषः|	and bring to us abundant food.
याभिः पक्थमवथो याभिरध्रिगुं याभिर्बभ्रुं विजोषसम|	the aids wherewith ye helped paktha and adhrigt and babhru severed from his friends.
ताभिर्नो मक्षू तूयमश्विना गतं भिषज्यतंयदातुरम|	with those o aśvins come hither with speed and soon and heal whatever is diseased.
यदध्रिगावो अध्रिगू इदा चिदह्नो अश्विना हवामहे|	when we continually invoke the aśvins the resistless at this time of day.
वयं गीर्भिर्विपन्यवः|	we lovers of the song with songs.
ताभिरा यातं वर्षणोप मे हवं विश्वप्सुं विश्ववार्यम|	through these ye mighty ones come hither to my call which brings all blessings wears all forms.
इषा मंहिष्ठा पुरुभूतमा नरा याभिः करिविं वव्र्धुस्ताभिरा गतम|	tlirough which allpresent heroes lavishest of food ye strengthened krvi come through these.
ताविदा चिदहानां तावश्विना वन्दमान उप बरुवे|	i speak to both of these as such these aśvins whom i reverence at this time of day.
ता उ नमोभिरीमहे|	with homage we entreat them both.
ताविद दोषा ता उषसि शुभस पती ता यामन रुद्रवर्तनी|	ye who are lords of splendour ye whose paths are red at eve at mom at sacrifice.
मा नो मर्ताय रिपवे वाजिनीवसू परो रुद्रावति खयतम|	give us not utterly as prey to mortal foe ye rudras lords of ample wealth.
आ सुग्म्याय सुग्म्यं पराता रथेनाश्विना वा सक्षणी|	for bliss i call the blissful car at morn the inseparable aśvins with their car.
हुवे पितेव सोभरी|	i call like sobhari our sire.
मनोजवसा वर्षणा मदच्युता मक्षुंगमाभिरुतिभिः|	rapid as thought and strong and speeding to thejoy bringingyour swiftlycoming help.
आरात्ताच्चिद भूतमस्मे अवसे पुर्वीभिः पुरुभोजसा|	be to us a protection even from far away lords of great wealth with many aids.
आ नो अश्वावदश्विना वर्तिर्यासिष्टं मधुपातमा नरा|	come wonderworkers to our home our home o aśvins rich in cattle steeds and gold.
गोमद दस्रा हिरण्यवत|	chief drinkers of the somas juice.
सुप्रावर्गं सुवीर्यं सुष्ठु वार्यमनाध्र्ष्टं रक्षस्विना|	choiceworthy strength heroic firm and excellent uninjured by the rakṣas foe.
अस्मिन्ना वामायाने वाजिनीवसू विश्वा वामानि धीमहि|	at this your coming nigh ye lords of ample wealth and all good things may we obtain.
पर कर्तान्य रजीषिणः कण्वा इन्द्रस्य गाथया|	kanvas tell forth with song the deeds of indra the impetuous.
मदे सोमस्य वोचत|	wrought in the somas wild delight.
यः सर्बिन्दमनर्शनिं पिप्रुं दासमहीशुवम|	strong god he slew anarsani srbinda pipru and the fiend.
वधीदुग्रो रिणन्नपः|	ahīśuva and loosed the floods.
नयर्बुदस्य विष्टपं वर्ष्माणं बर्हतस्तिर|	thou broughtest down the dwellingplace the height of lofty arbuda.
कर्षे तदिन्द्र पौंस्यम|	that exploit indra must be famed.
परति शरुताय वो धर्षत तूर्णाशं न गिरेरधि|	bold to your famous soma i call the fairvisored god for aid.
हुवेसुशिप्रमूतये|	down like a torrent from the hill.
स गोरश्वस्य वि वरजं मन्दानः सोम्येभ्यः|	rejoicing in the somadraughts hero burst open like a fort.
पुरं नशूर दर्षसि|	the stall of horses and of kine.
यदि मे रारणः सुत उक्थे वा दधसे चनः|	if my libation gladdens if thou takest pleasure in my laud.
आरादुपस्वधा गहि|	come with thy godhead from afar.
वयं घा ते अपि षमसि सतोतार इन्द्र गिर्वणः|	o indra lover of the song the singers of thy praise are we.
तवं नो जिन्व सोमपाः|	o somadrinker quicken us.
उत नः पितुमा भर संरराणो अविक्षितम|	and taking thy delight with us bring us still undiminished food.
मघवन भूरि ते वसु|	great is thy wealth o maghavan.
उत नो गोमतस कर्धि हिरण्यवतो अश्विनः|	make thou us rich in herds of kine in steeds in gold let us exert.
इळाभिः सं रभेमहि|	our strength in sacrificial gifts.
बर्बदुक्थं हवामहे सर्प्रकरस्नमूतये|	let us call him to aid whose hands stretch far to whom high laud is due.
साधु कर्ण्वन्तमवसे|	who worketh well to succour us.
यः संस्थे चिच्छतक्रतुरादीं कर्णोति वर्त्रहा|	he Śatakratu even in fight acts as a vṛtraslayer still.
जरित्र्भ्यः पुरूवसुः|	he gives his worshippers much wealth.
स नः शक्रश्चिदा शकद दानवानन्तराभरः|	may he this aakra strengthen us boon god who satisfies our needs.
इन्द्रोविश्वाभिरूतिभिः|	indra with all lhis saving helps.
यो रायोअवनिर्महान सुपारः सुन्वतः सखा|	to him the mighty stream of wealth the somapressers rescuing friend.
तमिन्द्रमभि गायत|	to indra sing your song of praise.
आयन्तारं महि सथिरं पर्तनासु शरवोजितम|	who bringeth what is great and firm who winneth glory in his wars.
भूरेरीशानमोजसा|	lord of vast wealth through power and might.
नकिरस्य शचीनां नियन्ता सून्र्तानाम|	there liveth none to cheek or stay his energies and gracious deeds.
नकिर्वक्ता नदादिति|	none who can say he giveth not.
न नूनं बरह्मणां रणं पराशूनामस्ति सुन्वताम|	no debt is due by brahmans now by active men who press the juice.
न सोमो अप्रता पपे|	well hath each somadraught been paid.
पन्य इदुप गायत पन्य उक्थानि शंसत|	sing ye to him who must be praised say lauds to him who must be praised.
बरह्मा कर्णोतपन्य इत|	bring prayer to him who must be praised.
पन्य आ दर्दिरच्छता सहस्रा वाज्यव्र्तः|	may be unchecked strong meet for praise bring hundreds thousands forth to light.
इन्द्रो यो यज्वनो वर्धः|	indra who aids the worshipper.
वि षू चर सवधा अनु कर्ष्टीनामन्वाहुवः|	go with thy godlike nature forth go where the folk are calling thee.
इन्द्र पिब सुतानाम|	drink indra of the drops we pour.
पिब सवधैनवानामुत यस्तुग्र्ये सचा|	drink milky draughts which are thine own this too which was with tugrya once.
उतायमिन्द्र यस्तव|	this is it indra that is thine.
अतीहि मन्युषाविणं सुषुवांसमुपारणे|	pass him who psours libations out in angry mood or after sin.
इमं रातंसुतं पिब|	here drink the juice we offer thee.
इहि तिस्रः परावत इहि पञ्च जनानति|	over the three great distances past the five peoples go thy way.
धेना इन्द्रावचाकशत|	o indra noticing our voice.
सूर्यो रश्मिं यथा सर्जा तवा यछन्तु मे गिरः|	send forth thy ray like sūrya let my songs attract thee hitherward.
निम्नमापो न सध्र्यक|	like waters gathering to the vale.
अध्वर्यवा तु हि षिञ्च सोमं वीराय शिप्रिणे|	now to the hero fair of cheek adhvaryu pour the soma forth.
भरासुतस्य पीतये|	bring of the juice that he may drink.
य उद्नः फलिगं भिनन नयक सिन्धून्रवास्र्जत|	who cleft the watercloud in twain loosed rivers for their downward flow.
यो गोषुपक्वं धारयत|	and set the ripe milk in the kine.
अहन वर्त्रं रचीषम और्णवाभमहीशुवम|	he meet for praise slew vṛtra slew ahīśuva urnavabhas son.
हिमेनाविध्यदर्बुदम|	and pierced through arbuda with frost.
पर व उग्राय निष्टुरेअषाळ्हाय परसक्षिणे|	to him your matchless mighty one unconquerable conqueror.
देवत्तं बरह्म गायत|	sing forth the prayer which gods have given.
यो विश्वान्यभि वरता सोमस्य मदे अन्धसः|	indra who in the wild delight of soma juice considers here.
इन्द्रो देवेषु चेतति|	all holy laws among the gods.
इह तया सधमाद्या हरी हिरण्यकेश्या|	hither let these thy bays who share thy banquet steeds with golden manes.
वोळ्हामभि परयो हितम|	convey thee to the feast prepared.
अर्वाञ्चं तवा पुरुष्टुत परियमेधस्तुता हरी|	hither o thou whom many laud the bays whom priyamedha praised.
सोमपेयायवक्षतः|	shall bring thee to the somadraught.
कदा वसो सतोत्रं हर्यत आव शमशा रुधद वाः|	when vasu wilt thou love the laud now let the channel bring the stream.
दीर्घं सुतं वाताप्याय|	the juice is ready to ferment.
हरी यस्य सुयुजा विव्रता वेरर्वन्तानु शेपा|	he whose two bay steeds harnessed well swerving pursue the birds tailplumes.
उभारजी न केशिना पतिर्दन|	with rowing manes like heaven and earth he is the lord with power to give.
अप योरिन्द्रः पापज आ मर्तो न शश्रमाणो बिभीवान|	bereft of skill is indra if like some outwearied man he fears.
शुभे यद युयुजे तविषीवान|	the sinner when the mighty hath prepared himself for victory.
सचायोरिन्द्रश्चर्क्र्ष आनुपानसः सपर्यन|	indra with these drives round until he meets with one to worship him.
नदयोर्विव्रतयोः शूर इन्द्रः|	indra is master of the pair who snort and swerve upon their way.
अधि यस्तस्थौ केशवन्ता वयचस्वन्ता न पुष्ट्यै|	borne onward by the longmaned steeds who stretch themselves as twere for food.
वनोति शिप्राभ्यां शिप्रिणीवान|	the god who wears the helm defends them with his jaws.
परास्तौद रष्वौजा रष्वेभिस्ततक्ष शूरः शवसा|	the mighty sang with lofty ones the hero fashioned with his strength.
रभुर्न करतुभिर्मातरिश्वा|	like skilful mātariśvan with his power and might.
वज्रं यश्चक्रे सुहनाय दस्यवे हिरीमशो हिरीमान|	the bolt which pierced at once the vitals of the dasyu easy to be slain.
अरुतहनुरद्भुतं न रजः|	with jaw uninjured like the wondrous firmament.
अव नो वर्जिना शिशीह्य रचा वनेमान्र्चः|	grind off our sins with song will we conquer the men who sing no hymns.
नाब्रह्मा यज्ञर्धग जोषति तवे|	not easily art thou pleased with prayerless sacrifice.
ऊर्ध्वा यत ते तरेतिनी भूद यज्ञस्य धूर्षु सद्मन|	when threefold flame burns high for thee to rest on poles of sacrifice.
सजूर्नावं सवयशसं सचायोः|	thou with the living joyest in the selfbright ship.
शरिये ते पर्श्निरुपसेचनी भूच्छ्रिये दर्विररेपाः|	thy glory was the speckled cup thy glory was the flawless scoop.
यया सवे पात्रे सिञ्चस उत|	wherewith thou pourest into thy receptacle.
शतं वा यदसुर्य परति तवा सुमित्र इत्थास्तौद दुर्मित्रैत्थास्तौ|	as hundreds o immortal god have sung to thee so hath sumitra yea durmitra praised thee here.
आवो यद दस्युहत्ये कुत्सपुत्रं परावो यद्दस्युहत्ये कुत्सवत्सम|	what time thou holpest kutsas son when dasyus fell yea holpest kutsas darling when the dasyus died.
मनीषिणः पर भरध्वं मनीषां यथायथा मतयःसन्ति नर्णाम|	bring forth your sacred song ye prudent singers even as are the thoughts of human beings.
इन्द्रं सत्यैरेरयामा कर्तेभिः स हिवीरो गिर्वणस्युर्विदानः|	let us draw indra with true deeds anear us he loves our songs the hero and is potent.
रतस्य हि सदसो धीतिरद्यौत सं गार्ष्टेयो वर्षभोगोभिरानट|	the hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship to the kine came the bull the heifers offipring.
उदतिष्ठत तविषेणा रवेण महान्ति चित्सं विव्याचा रजांसि|	with mighty bellowing hath he arisen and hath pervaded even the spacious regions.
इन्द्रः किल शरुत्या अस्य वेद स हि जिष्णुः पथिक्र्त्सूर्याय|	indra knows verily how to hear our singing for he victorious made a path for sūrya.
आन मेनां कर्ण्वन्नच्युतो भुवद गोः पतिर्दिवः सनजा अप्रतीतः|	he made the cow and be became the sovran of heaven primeval matchless and unshaken.
इन्द्रो मह्ना महतो अर्णवस्य वरतामिनादङगिरोभिर्ग्र्णानः|	praised by aṅgirases indra demolished with might the works of the great watery monster.
पुरूणि चिन नि तताना रजांसि दाधार योधरुणं सत्यताता|	full many regions too hath he pervaded and by his truth supported earths foundation.
इन्द्रो दिवः परतिमानं पर्थिव्या विश्वा वेद सवना हन्तिशुष्णम|	the counterpart of heaven and earth is indra he knoweth all libations slayeth Śuṣṇa.
महीं चिद दयामातनोत सूर्येण चास्कम्भ चित्कम्भनेन सकभीयान|	the vast sky with the sun hath he extended and best otpillars stayed it with a pillar.
वज्रेण हि वर्त्रहा वर्त्रमस्तरदेवस्य शूशुवानस्यमायाः|	the vṛtraslaver with his bolt felled vṛtra the magic of the godless waxen mighty.
वि धर्ष्णो अत्र धर्षता जघन्थाथाभवोमघवन बाह्वोजाः|	here hast thou bold assailant boldly conquered yea then thine arms o maghavan were potent.
सचन्त यदुषसः सूर्येण चित्रामस्य केतवो रामविन्दन|	when the dawns come attendant upon sūrya their rays discover wealth of divers colours.
आ यन नक्षत्रं दद्र्शे दिवो न पुनर्यतो नकिरद्धा नु वेद|	the star of heaven is seen as twere approaching none knoweth aught of it as it departeth.
दूरं किल परथमा जग्मुरासामिन्द्रस्य याः परसवेसस्रुरापः|	far have they gone the first of all these waters the waters that flowed forth when indra sent them.
कव सविदग्रं कव बुध्न आसामापोमध्यं कव वो नूनमन्तः|	where is their spring and where is their foundation where now ye waters is your inmost centre.
सर्जः सिन्धून्रहिना जग्रसानानादिदेताः पर विविज्रेजवेन|	thou didst free rivers swallowed by the dragon and rapidly they set themselves in motion.
मुमुक्षमाणा उत या मुमुच्रेअधेदेता नरमन्ते नितिक्ताः|	those that were loosed and those that longed for freedom excited now to speed they run unresting.
सध्रीचीः सिन्धुमुशतीरिवायन सनाज्जार आरितःपूर्भिदासाम|	yearning together they have sped to sindhu the fortdestroyer praised of old hath loved them.
अस्तमा ते पार्थिवा वसून्यस्मे जग्मुःसून्र्ता इन्द्र पूर्वीः|	indra may thy terrestrial treasures reach us and our full songs of joy approach thy dwelling.
उषासानक्ता बर्हती सुपेशसा दयावाक्षामा वरुणोमित्रो अर्यमा|	there are the dawn and night the grand and beauteous pair earth heaven and varuṇa mitra and aryaman.
इन्द्रं हुवे मरुतः पर्वतानप आदित्यान्द्यावाप्र्थिवी अपः सवः|	indra i call the maruts mountains and the floods Ādityas heaven and earth the waters and the sky.
दयौश्च नः पर्थिवी च परचेतस रतावरी रक्षतामंहसोरिषः|	may dyaus and prthivi wise true to holy law keep us in safety from distress and injury.
मा दुर्विदत्रा निरतिर्न ईशत तद देवानामवोद्या वर्णीमहे|	let not malignant nirrti rule over us we crave today this gracious favour of the gods.
विश्वस्मान नो अदितिः पात्वंहसो माता मित्रस्य वरुणस्यरेवतः|	mother of mitra and of opulent varuṇa may aditi preserve us safe from all distress.
सवर्वज्ज्योतिरव्र्कं नशीमहि तद देवानां|	may we obtain the light of heaven without a foe we crave this gracious favour of the gods today.
गरावा वदन्नप रक्षांसि सेधतु दुष्वप्न्यं निरतिंविश्वमत्रिणम|	may ringing pressstones keep the rākṣasas afar ill dream and nirrti and each voracious fiend.
आदित्यं शर्म मरुतामशीमहि तद्देवानां|	may the Ādityas and the maruts shelter us we crave this gracious favour of the gods today.
एन्द्रो बर्हिः सीदतु पिन्वतामिळा बर्हस्पतिः सामभिरकवो अर्चतु|	full flow libations on our grass let indra sit bṛhaspati the singer laud with sāma hymns.
सुप्रकेतं जीवसे मन्म धीमहि तद्देवानां|	wise be our hearts imaginings that we may live we crave this gracious favour of the gods today.
दिविस्प्र्शं यज्ञमस्माकमश्विना जीराध्वरं कर्णुतंसुम्नमिष्टये|	ye aśvins make our sacrifice ascend to heaven and animate the rite that it may send us bliss.
पराचीनरश्मिमाहुतं घर्तेन तद्देवानां|	offered with holy oil with forwardspeeding rein we crave the gracious favour of the gods today.
उप हवये सुहवं मारुतं गणं पावकं रष्वं सख्यायशम्भुवम|	hither i call the band of maruts swift to hear great purifying bringing bliss to he our friends.
रायस पोषं सौश्रवसाय धीमहि तद्देवानां|	may we increase our wealth to glorify our name we crave this graciousfavour of the gods today.
अपां पेरुं जीवधन्यं भरामहे देवाव्यं सुहवमध्वरश्रियम|	we bring the stay of life who makes the waters swell swifthearing friend of gods who waits on sacrifice.
सुरश्मिं सोममिन्द्रियं यमीमहि तद्देवानां|	may we control that power soma whose rays are bright we crave this gracious favour of the gods today.
सनेम तत सुसनिता सनित्वभिर्वयं जीवा जीवपुत्रानागसः|	alive ourselves with living sons devoid of guilt may we win this with winners by fair means to win.
बरह्मद्विषो विष्वगेनो भरेरत तद्देवानां|	let the prayerhaters bear our sin to every side we crave this gracious favour of the gods today.
ये सथा मनोर्यज्ञियास्ते शर्णोतन यद वो देवा ईमहेतद ददातन|	hear us o ye who claim the worship of mankind and give us o ye gods the gift for which we pray.
जैत्रं करतुं रयिमद वीरवद यशस्तद्देवानां|	victorious wisdom fame with heroes and with wealth we crave today this gracious favour of the gods.
महदद्य महतामा वर्णीमहेअवो देवानां बर्हतामनर्वणाम|	we crave the gracious favour of the gods today great favour of great gods sublime and free from foes.
यथा वसु वीरजातं नशामहै तद्देवानां|	that we may gain rich treasure sprung from hero sons we crave this gracious favour of the gods today.
महो अग्नेः समिधानस्य शर्मण्यनागा मित्रे वरुणेस्वस्तये|	in great enkindled agnis keeping and for bliss free from all sin before mitra and varuṇa.
शरेष्ठे सयाम सवितुः सवीमनि तद्देवानां|	may we share savitars best animating help we crave this gracious favour of the gods today.
ये सवितुः सत्यसवस्य विश्वे मित्रस्य वरते वरुणस्यदेवाः|	all ye the gods whom savitar the father of truth and varuṇa and mitra govern.
ते सौभगं वीरवद गोमदप्नो दधातनद्रविणं चित्रमस्मे|	give us prosperity with hero children and opulence in kine and various treasure.
सविता पश्चातात सविता पुरस्तात सवितोत्तरात्तात्सविताधरात्तात|	savitar savitar from cast and westward savitar savitar from north and southward.
सविता नः सुवतु सर्वतातिं सविता नोरासतां दीर्घमयुः|	savitar send us perfect health and comfort savitar let our days of life be lengthened.
वने न वा यो नयधायि चाकञ्छुचिर्वां सतोमो भुरणावजीगः|	as sits the young bird on the tree rejoicing ye swift pair have been roused by clear laudation.
यस्येदिन्द्रः पुरुदिनेषु होता नर्णां नर्योन्र्तमः कषपावान|	whose heraldpriest through many days is indra earths guardian friend of men the best of heroes.
पर ते अस्या उषसः परापरस्या नर्तौ सयाम नर्तमस्यन्र्णाम|	may we when this dawn and the next dance hither be thy best servants most heroic hero.
अनु तरिशोकः शतमावहन नॄन कुत्सेन रथो योसत ससवान|	let the victorious car with triple splendour bring hitherward the hundred chiefs with kutsa.
कस्ते मद इन्द्र रन्त्यो भूद दुरो गिरो अभ्युग्रो वि धाव|	what was the gladdening draught that pleased thee indra speed through our doors to songs for thou art mighty.
कद वाहो अर्वागुप मा मनीषा आ तवा शक्यमुपमंराधो अन्नैः|	why comest thou to me what gift attracts thee fain would i bring thee food most meet to offer.
कदु दयुम्नमिन्द्र तवावतो नॄन कया धिया करसे कन नागन|	indra what fame hath one like thee mid heroes with what plan wilt thou act why hast thou sought us.
मित्रो न सत्य उरुगाय भर्त्या अन्ने समस्य यदसन्मनीषाः|	as a true friend widestrider to sustain us since food absorbs the thought of each among us.
परेरय सूरो अर्थं न पारं ये अस्य कामं जनिधा इवग्मन|	speed happily those as sūrya ends his journey who meet his wish as bridegrooms meet their spouses.
गिरश्च ये ते तुविजात पूर्वीर्नर इन्द्रप्रतिशिक्षन्त्यन्नैः|	men who present o indra strong by nature with food the many songs that tell thy praises.
मात्रे नु ते सुमिते इन्द्र पूर्वी दयौर्मज्मना पर्थिवीकाव्येन|	thine are two measures indra widewellmeted heaven for thy majesty earth for thy wisdom.
वराय ते घर्तवन्तः सुतासः सवाद्मन भवन्तुपीतये मधूनि|	here for thy choice are somas mixed with butter may the sweet meath be pleasant for thy drinking.
आ मध्वो अस्मा असिचन्नमत्रमिन्द्राय पूर्णं स हिसत्यराधाः|	they have poured out a bowl to him to indra full of sweet juice for faithful is his bounty.
स वाव्र्धे वरिमन्ना पर्थिव्या अभि करत्वानर्यः पौंस्यैश्च|	oer earths expanse hath he grown great by wisdom the friend of man and by heroic exploits.
वयानळ इन्द्रः पर्तनाः सवोजा आस्मै यतन्ते सख्यायपूर्वीः|	indra hath conquered in his wars the mighty men strive in multitudes to win his friendship.
आ समा रथं न पर्तनासु तिष्ठ यं भद्रयासुमत्या चोदयासे|	ascend thy chariot as it were in battle which thou shalt drive to us with gracious favour.
इन्द्र दर्ह्य मघवन तवावदिद भुज इह सतुतः सुतपाबोधि नो वर्धे|	be like thyself o indra strong for our delight here lauded aid us maghavan drinker of the juice.
देवेभिर्नः सविता परावतु शरुतमासर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	savitar with the gods protect us hear ye twain we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
भराय सु भरत भागं रत्वियं पर वायवे शुचिपेक्रन्ददिष्टये|	bring swift for offering the snare that suits the time to the puredrinker vāyu roaring as he goes.
गौरस्य यः पयसः पीतिमानश आसर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	to him who hath approached the draught of shining milk we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
आ नो देवः सविता साविषद वय रजूयते यजमानायसुन्वते|	may savitar the god send us full life to each who sacrifices lives aright and pours the juice.
यथा देवान परतिभूषेम पाकवदा सर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	that we with simple hearts may wait upon the gods we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
इन्द्रो अस्मे सुमना अस्तु विश्वहा राजा सोमः सुवितस्याध्येतु नः|	may indra evermore be gracious unto us and may king soma meditate our happiness.
यथायथा मित्रधितानि सन्दधुरा सर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	even as men secure the comfort of a friend we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
इन्द्र उक्थेन शवसा परुर्दधे बर्हस्पते परतरीतास्यायुषः|	indra hath given the body with its song and strength bṛhaspati thou art the lengthener of life.
यज्ञो मनुः परमतिर्नः पिता हि कमासर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	the sacrifice is manu providence our sire we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
इन्द्रस्य नु सुक्र्तं दैव्यं सहोअग्निर्ग्र्हे जरितामेधिरः कविः|	indra possesseth might celestial nobly formed the singer in the house is agni prudent sage.
यज्ञश्च भूद विदथे चारुरन्तम आसर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	he is the sacrifice in synod fair most near we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
न वो गुहा चक्र्म भूरि दुष्क्र्तं नाविष्ट्यं वसवोदेवहेळनम|	not often have we sinned against you secretly nor vasus have we openly provoked the gods.
माकिर्नो देवा अन्र्तस्य वर्पस आ सर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	not one of its ye gods hath worn an alien shape we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
अपामीवां सविता साविषन नयग वरीय इदप सेधन्त्वद्रयः|	may savitar remove from us our malady and may the mountains keep it far away from where.
गरावा यत्र मधुषुदुच्यते बर्हदासर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	the pressstone as it sheds the meath rings loudly forth we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
ऊर्ध्वो गरावा वसवोअस्तु सोतरि विश्वा दवेषांसि सनुतर्युयोत|	ye vasus let the stone the presser stand erect avert all enmities and keep them far remote.
स नो देवः सविता पायुरीड्य आ सर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	our guard to be adored is savitar this god we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
ऊर्जं गावो यवसे पीवो अत्तन रतस्य याः सदने कोशेङगध्वे|	eat strength and fatness in the pasture kine who are balmed at the reservoir and at the seat of law.
तनूरेव तन्वो अस्तु भेषजमा सर्वतातिंदितिं वर्णीमहे|	so let your body be our bodys medicine we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
करतुप्रावा जरिता शश्वतामव इन्द्र इद भद्राप्रमतिः सुतावताम|	the singer fills the spirit all mens love hath he indra takes kindly care of those who pour the juice.
पूर्णमूधर्दिव्यं यस्य सिक्तया सर्वतातिमदितिं वर्णीमहे|	for his libation is the heavenly udder full we ask for freedom and complete felicity.
चित्रस्ते भानुः करतुप्रा अभिष्टिः सन्ति सप्र्धोजरणिप्रा अध्र्ष्टाः|	wondrous thy spiritfilling light triumpliant thy hosts save from decay and are resistless.
रजिष्ठया रज्या पश्व आ गोस्तूतूर्षत्य पर्यग्रं दुवस्युः|	the pious votary by straightest pathway speeds to possess the best of all the cattle.
अक्षीभ्यां ते नासिकाभ्यां कर्णाभ्यां छुबुकादधि|	from both thy nostrils from thine eyes from both thine ears and from thy chin.
यक्ष्मं शीर्षण्यं मस्तिष्काज्जिह्वाया वि वर्हामि ते|	forth from thy head and brain and tongue i drive thy malady away.
गरीवाभ्यस्त उष्णिहाभ्यः कीकसाभ्यो अनूक्यात|	from the necktendons and the neck from the breastbones and from the spine.
यक्ष्मं दोषण्यमंसाभ्यां बाहुभ्यां वि वर्हामि ते|	from shoulders upper lower arms i drive thy malady away.
आन्त्रेभ्यस्ते गुदाभ्यो वनिष्ठोर्ह्र्दयादधि|	from viscera and all within forth from the rectum from the heart.
यक्ष्मम्मतस्नाभ्यां यक्नः पलाशिभ्यो वि वर्हामि ते|	from kidneys liver and from spleen i drive thy malady away.
ऊरुभ्यां ते अष्ठीवद्भ्यां पार्ष्णिभ्यां परपदाभ्याम|	from thighs from kneecaps and from heels and from the forepart of the feet.
यक्ष्मं शरोणिभ्यां भासदाद भंससो वि वर्हामि ते|	from hips from stomach and from groin i drive thy malady away.
मेहनाद वनंकरणाल लोमभ्यस्ते नखेभ्यः|	from what is voided from within and from thy hair and from they nails.
यक्ष्मंसर्वस्मादात्मनस्तमिदं वि वर्हामि ते|	from all thyself from top to toe i drive thy malady away.
अङगादअङगाल लोम्नोलोम्नो जातं पर्वणिपर्वणि|	from every member every hair disease that comes in every joint.
यक्ष्मंसर्वस्मादात्मनस्तमिदं वि वर्हामि ते|	from all thyself from top to toe i drive thy malady away.
पर ते रथं मिथूक्र्तमिन्द्रोअवतु धर्ष्णुया|	for thee may indra boldly speed the car that works on either side.
अस्मिन्नाजौ पुरुहूत शरवाय्ये धनभक्षेषु नोअव|	favour us muchinvoked in this most glorious fight against the raiders of our wealth.
उत सम वातो वहति वासोअस्या अधिरथं यदजयत सहस्रम|	loose in the wind the womans robe was streaming what time she won a carload worth a thousand.
रथीरभून मुद्गलानी गविष्टौ भरे कर्तं वयचेदिन्द्रसेना|	the charioteer in fight was mudgalani she indras dart heaped up the prize of battle.
अन्तर्यछ जिघांसतो वज्रमिन्द्राभिदासतः|	o indra cast thy bolt among assailants who would slaughter us.
दासस्यवा मघवन्नार्यस्य वा सनुतर्यवया वधम|	the weapon both of dāsa and of Ārya foe keep far away o maghavan.
उद्नो हरदमपिबज्जर्ह्र्षाणः कूटं सम तरंहदभिमातिमेति|	the bull in joy had drunk a lake of water his shattering horn encountered an opponent.
पर मुष्कभारः शरव इछमानोअजिरम्बाहू अभरत सिषासन|	swiftly in vigorous strength eager for glory he stretched his forefeet fain to win and triumph.
नयक्रन्दयन्नुपयन्त एनममेहयन वर्षभं मध्य आजेः|	they came anear the bull they made him thunder made him pour rain down ere the fight was ended.
तेन सूभर्वं शतवत सहस्रं गवां मुद्गलः परधनेजिगाय|	and mudgala thereby won in the contest wellpastured kine in hundreds and in thousands.
ककर्दवे वर्षभो युक्त आसीदवावचीत सारथिरस्य केशी|	in hope of victory that bull was harnessed kesi the driver urged him on with shouting.
दुधेर्युक्तस्य दरवतः सहानस रछन्ति षमा निष्पदोमुद्गलानीम|	as he ran swiftly with the car behind him his lifted heels pressed close on mudgalani.
उत परधिमुदहन्नस्य विद्वानुपायुनग वंसगमत्रशिक्षन|	deftly for him he stretched the carpole forward guided the bull thereto and firmly yoked him.
इन्द्र उदावत पतिमघ्न्यानामरंहतपद्याभिः ककुद्मान|	indra vouchsafed the lord of cows his favour with mighty steps the buffalo ran onward.
शुनमष्त्राव्यचरत कपर्दी वरत्रायां दार्वानह्यमानः|	touched by the goad the shaggy beast went nobly bound to the pole by the yokes thong of leather.
नर्म्णानि कर्ण्वन बहवे जनाय गाःपस्पशानस्तविषीरधत्त|	performing deeds of might for many people he looking on the cows gained strength and vigour.
इमं तं पश्य वर्षभस्य युञ्जं काष्ठाया मध्येद्रुघणं शयानम|	here look upon this mace this bulls companion now lying midway on the field of battle.
येन जिगाय शतवत सहस्रं गवाम्मुद्गलः पर्तनाज्येषु|	therewith hath mudgala in ordered contest won for cattle for himself a hundred thousand.
आरे अघा को नवित्था ददर्श यं युञ्जन्ति तं वास्थापयन्ति|	far is the evil who hath here beheld it hither they bring the bull whom they are yoking.
नास्मै तर्णं नोदकमा भरन्त्युत्तरो धुरोवहति परदेदिशत|	to this they give not either food or water reaching beyond the pole it gives directions.
परिव्र्क्तेव पतिविद्यमानट पीप्याना कूचक्रेणेव सिञ्चन|	like one forsaken she hath found a husband and teemed as if her breast were full and flowing.
एषैष्या चिद रथ्या जयेम सुमङगलं सिनवदस्तु सातम|	with swiftlyracing chariot may we conquer and rich and blessed be our gains in battle.
तवं विश्वस्य जगतश्चक्षुरिन्द्रासि चक्षुषः|	thou indra art the mark whereon the eyes of all life rest when thou.
वर्षायदाजिं वर्षणा सिषाससि चोदयन वध्रिणा युजा|	a bull who drivest with thy bull wilt win the race together with thy weakling friend.
घर्मा समन्ता तरिव्र्तं वयापतुस्तयोर्जुष्टिम्मातरिश्वा जगाम|	two perfect springs of heat pervade the threefold and come for their delight is mātariśvan.
दिवस पयो दिधिषाणा अवेषन विदुर्देवाः सहसामानमर्कम|	craving the milk of heaven the gods are present well do they know the praisesong and the sāman.
तिस्रो देष्ट्राय निरतीरुपासते दीर्घश्रुतो वि हिजानन्ति वह्नयः|	the priests beard far away as they are ordered serve the three nirrtis for well they know them.
तासां नि चिक्युः कवयो निदानम्परेषु या गुह्येषु वरतेषु|	sages have traced the cause that first produced them dwelling in distant and mysterious chambers.
चतुष्कपर्दा युवतिः सुपेशा घर्तप्रतीका वयुनानि वस्ते|	the youthful one wellshaped with four locks braided brightened with oil puts on the ordinances.
तस्यां सुपर्णा वर्षणा नि षेदतुर्यत्र देवा दधिरेभागधेयम|	two birds of mighty power are seated near her there where the deities receive their portion.
एकः सुपर्णः स समुद्रमा विवेष स इदं विश्वम्भुवनं वि चष्टे|	one of these birds hath passed into the sea of air thence he looks round and views this universal world.
तं पाकेन मनसापश्यमन्तितस्तम्माता रेळि स उ रेळि मातरम|	with simple heart i have beheld him from anear his mother kisses him and he returns her kiss.
सुपर्णं विप्राः कवयो वचोभिरेकं सन्तं बहुधाकल्पयन्ति|	him with fair wings though only one in nature wise singers shape with songs in many figures.
छन्दांसि च दधतो अध्वरेषु गरहान सोमस्यमिमते दवादश|	while they at sacrifices fix the metres they measure out twelve chalices of soma.
षट्त्रिंशांश्च चतुरः कल्पयन्तश्छन्दांसि चदधत आद्वादशम|	while they arrange the four and sixandthirty and duly order up to twelve the measures.
यज्ञं विमाय कवयो मनीषर्क्सामाभ्यां पर रथं वर्तयन्ति|	having disposed the sacrifice thoughtful sages send the car forward with the rc and sāman.
चतुर्दशान्ये महिमानो अस्य तं धीरा वाचा पर णयन्तिसप्त|	the chariots majesties are fourteen others seven sages lead it onward with their voices.
आप्नानं तीर्थं क इह पर वोचद येन पथाप्रपिबन्ते सुतस्य|	who will declare to us the ford apnana the path whereby they drink first draughts of soma.
सहस्रधा पञ्चदशान्युक्था यावद दयावाप्र्थिवीतावदित तत|	the fifteen lauds are in a thousand places that is as vast as heaven and earth in measure.
सहस्रधा महिमानः सहस्रं यावद्ब्रह्म विष्ठितं तावती वाक|	a thousand spots contain the mighty thousand vāk spreadeth forth as far as prayer extendeth.
कश्छन्दसां योगमा वेद धीरः को धिष्ण्यां परतिवाचं पपाद|	what sage hath learned the metres application who hath gained vāk the spirits aim and object.
कं रत्विजामष्टमं शूरमाहुर्हरीिन्द्रस्य नि चिकाय कः सवित|	which ministering priest is called eighth hero who then hath tracked the two bay steeds of indra.
भूम्या अन्तं पर्येके चरन्ति रथस्य धूर्षु युक्तासोस्थुः|	yoked to his chariotpole there stood the coursers they only travel round earths farthest limits.
शरमस्य दायं वि भजन्त्येभ्यो यदा यमो भवतिहर्म्ये हितः|	these when their driver in his home is settled receive the allotted meed of their exertion.
हविष पान्तमजरं सवर्विदि दिविस्प्र्श्याहुतं जुष्टमग्नौ|	dear ageless sacrificial drink is offered in lightdiscovering heavenpervading agni.
तस्य भर्मणे भुवनाय देवा धर्मणे कंस्वधया पप्रथन्त|	the gods spread forth through his celestial nature that he might bear the world up and sustain it.
गीर्णं भुवनं तमसपगूळमाविः सवरभवज्जातेग्नौ|	the world was swallowed and concealed in darkness agni was born and light became apparent.
तस्य देवाः पर्थिवि दयौरुतापोअरणयन्नोषधीः सख्ये अस्य|	the deities the broad earth and the heavens and plants and waters gloried in his friendship.
देवेभिर्न्विषितो यज्ञियेभिरग्निं सतोषाण्यजरम्ब्र्हन्तम|	inspired by gods who claim our adoration i now will laud eternal lofty agni.
यो भानुना पर्थिविं दयामुतेमामाततानरोदसी अन्तरिक्षम|	him who hath spread abroad the earth with lustre this heaven and both the worlds and airs midregion.
यो होतासीत परथमो देवजुष्टो यं समञ्जन्नाज्येनाव्र्णानः|	earliest priest whom all the gods accepted and chose him and anointed him with butter.
स पतत्रीत्वरं सथ जगद यच्छ्वात्रमग्निरक्र्नोज्जातवेदः|	he swiftly made all things that fly stand travel all that hath motion agni jātavedas.
यज्जतवेदो भुवनस्य मूर्धन्नतिष्ठो अग्ने सह रोचनेन|	because thou agni jātavedas stoodest at the worlds head with thy refulgent splendour.
तं तवहेम मतिभिर्गीर्भिरुक्थैः स यज्ञियो अभवोरोदसिप्राः|	we sent thee forth with hymns and songs and praises thou filledst heaven and earth god meet for worship.
मूर्धा भुवो भवति नक्तमग्निस्ततः सुर्यो जायतेप्रातरुद्यन|	head of the world is agni in the nighttime then as the sun at morn springs up and rises.
मयामु तु यज्ञियानामेतमपो यत्तूर्णिश्चरति परजानन|	then to his task goes the prompt priest foreknowing the wondrous power of gods who must be honoured.
दर्शेन्यो यो महिना समिद्धोअरोचत दिवियोनिर्विभावा|	lovely is he who kindled in his greatness hath shone forth seated in the heavens refulgent.
तस्मिन्नग्नौ सूक्तवाकेन देवा हविर्विश्व अजुहवुस्तनूपाः|	with resonant hymns all gods who guard our bodies have offered up oblation in this agni.
सूक्तवकं परथममादिदग्निमादिद धविरजनयन्तदेवाः|	first the gods brought the hymnal into being then they engendered agni then oblation.
स एषां यज्ञो अभवत तनूपस्तं दयौर्वेदतं परिथिवि तमापः|	he was their sacrifice that guards our bodies him the heavens know the earth the waters know him.
यं देवासो अजनयन्ताग्निं यस्मिन्नाजुहवुर्भुवनानिविश्वा|	he agni whom the gods have generated in whom they offered up all worlds and creatures.
सो अर्चिषा पर्थिवीं दयामुतेमां रजूयमानोतपन महित्वा|	he with his bright glow heated earth and heaven urging himself right onward in his grandeur.
सतोमेन हि दिवि देवासो अग्निमजीजनञ्छक्तिभीरोदसिप्राम|	then by the laud the gods engendered agni in heaven who fills both worlds through strength and vigour.
तमू अक्र्ण्वन तरेधा भुवे कं स ओषधीःपचति विश्वरूपाः|	they made him to appear in threefold essence he ripens plants of every form and nature.
यदेदेनमदधुर्यज्ञियासो दिवि देवाः सूर्यमादितेयम|	what time the gods whose due is worship set him as sūrya son of aditi in heaven.
यदा चरिष्णू मिथुनावभूतामादित परापश्यन्भुवनानि विश्वा|	when the pair ever wandering sprang to being all creatures that existed looked upon them.
विश्वस्मा अग्निं भुवनाय देवा वैश्वानरं केतुमह्नामक्र्ण्वन|	for all the world of life the gods made agni vaiśvānara to be the days bright banner.
आ यस्ततानोषसो विभातीरपो ऊर्णोति तमोर्चिषा यन|	him who hath spread abroad the radiant mornings and coming with his light unveils the darkness.
वैश्वानरं कवयो यज्ञियासोअग्निं देवा अजनयन्नजुर्यम|	the wise and holy deities engendered agni vaiśvānara whom age neer touches.
नक्षत्रं परत्नममिनच्चरिष्णु यक्षस्याध्यक्षन्तविषं बर्हन्तम|	the ancient star that wanders on for ever lofty and strong lord of the living being.
वैश्वानरं विश्वहा दीदिवांसं मन्त्रैरग्निं कविमछा वदामः|	we call upon the sage with holy verses agni vaiśvānara the everbeaming.
यो महिम्ना परिबभूवोर्वी उतावस्तादुतदेवः परस्तात|	who hath surpassed both heaven and earth in greatness he is a god below a god above us.
दवे सरुती अश्र्णवं पितॄणामहं देवानामुतमर्त्यानाम|	i have heard mention of two several pathways ways of the fathers and of gods and mortals.
ताभ्यामिदं विश्वमेजत समेति यदन्तरापितरं मातरं च|	on these two paths each moving creature travels each thing between the father and the mother.
दवे समीची बिभ्र्तश्चरन्तं शीर्षतो जातं मनसाविम्र्ष्टम|	these two united paths bear him who journeys born from the head and pondered with the spirit.
स परत्यं विश्वा भुवनानि तस्थावप्रयुछन्तरणिर्भ्राजमानः|	he stands directed to all things existing hasting unresting in his fiery splendour.
यत्रा वदेते अवरः परश्च यज्ञन्योः कतरो नौ वि वेद|	which of us twain knows where they speak together upper and lower of the two riteleaders.
आ शेकुरित सधमादं सखायो नक्षन्त यज्ञं कैदं वि वोचत|	our friends have helped to gather our assembly they came to sacrifice who will announce it.
कत्यग्नयः कति सूर्यासः कत्युषासः कत्यु सविदापः|	how many are the fires and suns in number what is the number of the dawns and waters.
नोपस्पिजं वः पितरो वदामि पर्छामि वः कवयोविद्मने कम|	not jestingly i speak to you o fathers sages i ask you this for information.
यावन्मात्रमुषसो न परतीकं सुपर्ण्यो वसतेमातरिश्वः|	as great as is the fairwinged mornings presence to him who dwells beside us mātariśvan.
तावद दधात्युप यज्ञमायन बराह्मणोहोतुरवरो निषीदन|	is what the brahman does when he approaches to sacrifice and sits below the hotar.
यज्ञस्य वो रथ्यं विश्पतिं विशां होतारमक्तोरतिथिं विभावसुम|	i praise your charioteer of sacrifice the lord of men priest of the tribes refulgent guest of night.
शोचञ्छुष्कासु हरिणीषु जर्भुरद्व्र्षा केतुर्यजतो दयामशायत|	blazing amid dry plants snatching amid the green the strong the holy herald hath attained to heaven.
इममञ्जस्पामुभये अक्र्ण्वत धर्माणमग्निं विदथस्यसाधनम|	him agni gods and men have made their chief support who drinks the fatness and completes the sacrifice.
अक्तुं न यह्वमुषसः पुरोहितं तनूनपातमरुषस्य निंसते|	with kisses they caress the grandson of the red like the swift ray of light the household priest of dawn.
बळ अस्य नीथा वि पणेश्च मन्महे वया अस्य परहुताासुरत्तवे|	yea we discriminate his and the niggards ways his branches evermore are sent forth to consume.
यदा घोरासो अम्र्तत्वमाशतादिज्जनस्यदैव्यस्य चर्किरन|	when his terrific flames have reached the immortals world then men remember and extol the heavenly folk.
रतस्य हि परसितिर्द्यौरुरु वयचो नमो मह्यरमतिःपनीयसी|	for then the net of law dyaus and the wide expanse earth worship and devotion meet for highest praise.
इन्द्रो मित्रो वरुणः सं चिकित्रिरेअथो भगःसविता पूतदक्षसः|	varuṇa indra mitra were of one accord and savitar and bhaga lords of holy might.
पर रुद्रेण ययिना यन्ति सिन्धवस्तिरो महीमरमतिन्दधन्विरे|	onward with everroaming rudra speed the floods over aramati the mighty have they run.
येभिः परिज्मा परियन्नुरु जरयो वि रोरुवज्जठरे विश्वमुक्षते|	with them parijman moving round his vast domain loud bellowing bedews all things that are within.
कराणा रुद्रा मरुतो विश्वक्र्ष्टयो दिवः शयेनासोसुरस्य नीळयः|	straightway the rudras maruts visiting all men falcons of dyaus homedwellers with the asura.
तेभिश्चष्टे वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमेन्द्रोदेवेभिरर्वशेभिरर्वशः|	varuṇa mitra aryaman look on with these and the swiftmoving indra with swiftmoving gods.
इन्द्रे भुजं शशमानास आशत सूरो दर्शीके वर्षणश्च पौंस्ये|	with indra have they found enjoyment they who toil in the lights beauty in the very strong ones strength.
पर ये नवस्यार्हणा ततक्षिरे युजं वज्रंन्र्षदनेषु कारवः|	the singers who in mens assemblies forged for him according to his due his friend the thunderbolt.
सूरश्चिदा हरितो अस्य रीरमदिन्द्रादा कश्चिद भयतेतवीयसः|	even the suns bay coursers hath lie held in check each one fears indra as the mightiest of all.
भीमस्य वर्ष्णो जठरादभिश्वसो दिवेदिवेसहुरि सतन्नबाधितः|	unhindered from the airs vault thunders day by day the loud triumphant breathing of the fearful bull.
सतोमं वो अद्य रुद्राय शिक्वसे कषयद्वीराय नमसादिदिष्टन|	with humble adoration show this day your song of praise to mighty rudra ruler of the brave.
येभिः शिवः सववानेवयावभिर्दिवःसिषक्ति सवयशा निकामभिः|	with whom the eager ones going their ordered course he comes from heaven selfbright auspicious strong to guard.
ते हि परजाया अभरन्त वि शरवो बर्हस्पतिर्व्र्षभःसोमजामयः|	for these have spread abroad the fame of human kind the bull bṛhaspati and somas brotherhood.
यज्ञैरथर्वा परथमो वि धारयद देवादक्षैर्भ्र्गवः सं चिकित्रिरे|	atharvan first by sacrifices made men sure through skill the bhṛgus were esteemed of all as gods.
ते हि दयावाप्र्थिवी भूरिरेतसा नराशंसश्चतुरङगोयमोअदितिः|	for these the earth and heaven with their abundant seed fourbodied narāśaṁsa yama aditi.
देवस्त्वष्टा दरविणोदा रभुक्षणः पररोदसी मरुतो विष्णुरर्हिरे|	god tvaṣṭar wealthbestower the Ṛbhukṣaṇas rodasī maruts viṣṇu claim and merit praise.
उत सय न उशिजामुर्विया कविरहिः शर्णोतु बुध्न्योहवीमनि|	and may he too give car the sage from far away the dragon of the deep to this our yearning call.
सूर्यामासा विचरन्ता दिविक्षिता धियाशमीनहुषी अस्य बोधतम|	ye sun and moon who dwell in heaven and move in turn and with your thought o earth and sky observe this well.
पर नः पूषा चरथं विश्वदेव्योअपां नपादवतुवायुरिष्टये|	dear to all gods may pūṣan guard the ways we go the waters child and vāyu help us to success.
आत्मानं वस्यो अभि वातमर्चत तदश्विना सुहवा यामनि शरुतम|	sing lauds for your great bliss to wind the breath of all ye aśvins prompt to hear hear this upon your way.
विशामासामभयानामधिक्षितं गीर्भिरु सवयशसंग्र्णीमसि|	with hymns of praise we sing him who is throned as lord over these fearless tribes the selfresplendent one.
गनाभिर्विश्वाभिरदितिमनर्वणमक्तोर्युवानं नर्मणा अधा पतिम|	we praise nights youthful lord benevolent to men the foeless one the free with all celestial dames.
रेभदत्र जनुषा पूर्वो अङगिरा गरावाण ऊर्ध्वा अभिचक्षुरध्वरम|	by reason of his birth here aṅgiras first sang the pressingstones upraised beheld the sacrifice.
येभिर्विहाया अभवद विचक्षणःपाथः सुमेकं सवधितिर्वनन्वति|	the stones through which the sage became exceeding vast and the sharp axe obtains in fight the beauteous place.
तीव्रस्याभिवयसो अस्य पाहि सर्वरथा वि हरी इह मुञ्च|	taste this strong draught enriched with offered viands with all thy chariot here unyoke thy coursers.
इन्द्र मा तवा यजमानासो अन्ये नि रीरमन तुभ्यमिमेसुतासः|	let not those other sacrificers stay thee indra these juices shed for thee are ready.
तुभ्यं सुतास्तुभ्यमु सोत्वासस्त्वां गिरः शवात्र्याा हवयन्ति|	thine is the juice effused thine are the juices yet to be pressed our resonant songs invite thee.
इन्द्रेदमद्य सवनं जुषाणो विश्वस्यविद्वानिह पाहि सोमम|	o indra pleased today with this libation come thou who knowest all and drink the soma.
य उशता मनसा सोममस्मै सर्वह्र्दा देवकामः सुनोति|	whoso devoted to the god effuses soma for him with yearning heart and spirit.
न गा इन्द्रस्तस्य परा ददाति परशस्तमिच्चारुमस्मैक्र्णोति|	never doth indra give away his cattle for him he makes the lovely soma famous.
अनुस्पष्टो भवत्येषो अस्य यो अस्मै रेवान न सुनोति सोमम|	he looks with ioving favour on the mortal who like a rich man pours for him the soma.
निररत्नौ मघवा तं दधाति बरह्मद्विषो हन्त्यनानुदिष्टः|	maghavan in his bended arm supports him he slays unasked the men who hate devotion.
अश्वायन्तो गव्यन्तो वाजयन्तो हवामहे तवोपगन्तवा उ|	we call on thee to come to us desirous of goods and spoil of cattle and of horses.
आभूषन्तस्ते सुमतौ नवायां वयमिन्द्र तवा शुनंहुवेम|	for thy new love and favour are we present let us invoke thee indra as our welfare.
ईजानमिद दयौर्गूर्तावसुरीजानं भूमिरभिप्रभूषणि|	may dyaus the lord of lauded wealth and earth stand by the man who offers sacrifice.
ईजानं देवावश्विनावभि सुम्नैरवर्धताम|	and may the aśvins both the gods strengthen the worshipper with bliss.
ता वां मित्रावरुणा धारयत्क्षिती सुषुम्नेषितत्वतायजामसि|	as such we honour you mitra and varuṇa with hasty zeal most blest you who sustain the folk.
युवोः कराणाय सख्यैरभि षयाम रक्षसः|	so may we through your friendship for the worshipper subdue the fiends.
अधा चिन नु यद दिधिषामहे वामभि परियं रेक्णःपत्यमानाः|	and when we seek to win your love and friendship weẉho have precious wealth in our possession.
दद्वान वा यत पुष्यति रेक्णः सं वारन्नकिरस्य मघानि|	or when the worshipper augments his riches let not his treasures be shut up.
असावन्यो असुर सूयत दयौस्त्वं विश्वेषां वरुणासिराजा|	that other asura too was born of heaven thou art o varuṇa the king of all men.
मूर्धा रथस्य चाकन नैतावतैनसान्तकध्रुक|	the chariots lord was well content forbearing to anger death by sin so great.
अस्मिन सवेतच्छकपूत एनो हिते मित्रे निगतान हन्ति वीरान|	this sin hath sakaputa here committed heroes who fled to their dear friend he slayeth.
अवोर्वा यद धात तनूष्ववः परियासु यज्ञियास्वर्वा|	when the steed bringeth down your grace and favour in bodies dear and worshipful.
युवोर्हि मातादितिर्विचेतसा दयौर्न भूमिः पयसापुपूतनि|	your mother aditi ye wise was purified with water even as earth is purified from heaven.
अव परिया दिदिष्टन सूरो निनिक्त रश्मिभिः|	show love and kindness here below wash her in rays of heavenly light.
युवं हयप्नराजावसीदतं तिष्ठद रथं नधूर्षदं वनर्षदम|	ye twain have seated you as lords of wealth as one who mounts a car to him who sits upon the pole upon the wood.
ता नः कणूकयन्तीर्न्र्मेधस्तत्रे अंहसः सुमेधस्तत्रे अंहसः|	these our disheartened tribes nrmedhas saved from woe sumedhas saved from woe.
परावेपा मा बर्हतो मादयन्ति परवातेजा इरिणे वर्व्र्तानाः|	sprung from tall trees on windy heights these rollers transport me as they turn upon the table.
सोमस्येव मौजवतस्य भक्षो विभीदको जाग्र्विर्मह्यमछान|	dearer to me the die that never slumbers than the deep draught of mujavans own soma.
न मा मिमेथ न जिहीळ एषा शिवा सखिभ्य उत मह्यमासीत|	she never vexed me nor was angry with me but to my friends and me was ever gracious.
अक्षस्याहमेकपरस्य हेतोरनुव्रतामप जायामरोधम|	for the dies sake whose single point is final mine own devoted wife i alienated.
दवेष्टि शवश्रूरप जाया रुणद्धि न नाथितो विन्दतेमर्डितारम|	my wife holds me aloof her mother hates me the wretched man finds none to give him comfort.
अश्वस्येव जरतो वस्न्यस्य नाहं विन्दामिकितवस्य भोगम|	as of a costly horse grown old and feeble i find not any profit of the gamester.
अन्ये जायां परि मर्शन्त्यस्य यस्याग्र्धद वेदने वाज्यक्षः|	others caress the wife of him whose riches the die hath coveted that rapid courser.
पिता मता भरातर एनमाहुर्न जानीमो नयताबद्धमेतम|	of him speak father mother brothers saying we know him not bind him and take him with you.
यदादीध्ये न दविषाण्येभिः परायद्भ्योअव हीयेसखिभ्यः|	when i resolve to play with these no longer my friends depart from me and leave me lonely.
नयुप्ताश्च बभ्रवो वाचमक्रतनेमीदेषां निष्क्र्तं जारिणीव|	when the brown dice thrown on the board have rattled like a fond girl i seek the place of meeting.
सभामेति कितवः पर्छमानो जेष्यामीति तन्वाशूशुजानः|	the gamester seeks the gamblinghouse and wonders his body all afire shall i be lucky.
अक्षासो अस्य वि तिरन्ति कामं परतिदीव्नेदधत आ कर्तानि|	still do the dice extend his eager longing staking his gains against his adversary.
अक्षास इदनकुशिनो नितोदिनो निक्र्त्वानस्तपनास्तापयिष्णवः|	dice verily are armed with goads and drivinghooks deceiving and tormenting causing grievous woe.
कुमारदेष्णा जयतः पुनर्हणो मध्वासम्प्र्क्ताः कितवस्य बर्हणा|	they give frail gifts and then destroy the man who wins thickly anointed with the players fairest good.
तरिपञ्चाशः करीळति वरात एषां देव इव सवितासत्यधर्मा|	merrily sports their troop the threeandfifty like savitar the god whose ways are faithful.
उग्रस्य चिन मन्यवे ना नमन्ते राजा चिदेभ्योनम इत कर्णोति|	they bend not even to the mightys anger the king himself pays homage and reveres them.
नीचा वर्तन्त उपरि सफुरन्त्यहस्तासो हस्तवन्तं सहन्ते|	downward they roll and then spring quickly upward and handless force the man with hands to serve them.
दिव्या अङगारा इरिणे नयुप्ताः शीताः सन्तो हर्दयंनिर्दहन्ति|	cast on the board like lumps of magic charcoal though cold themselves they burn the heart to ashes.
जाया तप्यते कितवस्य हीना माता पुत्रस्य चरतः कवस्वित|	the gamblers wife is left forlorn and wretched the mother mourns the son who wanders homeless.
रणावा बिभ्यद धनमिछमानोअन्येषामस्तमुपनक्तमेति|	in constant fear in debt and seeking riches he goes by night unto the home of others.
सत्रियं दर्ष्ट्वाय कितवं ततापान्येषां जायांसुक्र्तं च योनिम|	sad is the gambler when he sees a matron anothers wife and his wellordered dwelling.
पूर्वाह्णे अश्वान युयुजे हि बभ्रून सोग्नेरन्ते वर्षलः पपाद|	he yokes the brown steeds in the early morning and when the fire is cold sinks down an outcast.
यो वः सेनानीर्महतो गणस्य राजा वरातस्य परथमोबभूव|	to the great captain of your mighty army who hath become the hosts imperial leader.
तस्मै कर्णोमि न धना रुणध्मि दशाहम्प्राचीस्तद रतं वदामि|	to him i show my ten extended fingers i speak the truth no wealth am i withholding.
अक्षैर्मा दीव्यः कर्षिमित कर्षस्व वित्ते रमस्व बहुमन्यमानः|	play not with dice no cultivate thy cornland enjoy the gain and deem that wealth sufficient.
तत्र गावः कितव तत्र जाया तन मे विचष्टे सवितायमर्यः|	there are thy cattle there thy wife o gambler so this good savitar himself hath told me.
मित्रं कर्णुध्वं खलु मर्लता नो मा नो घोरेण चरताभिध्र्ष्णु|	make me your friend show us some little mercy assail us not with your terrific fierceness.
नि वो नु मन्युर्विशतामरातिरन्यो बभ्रूणाम्प्रसितौ नवस्तु|	appeased be your malignity and anger and let the brown dice snare some other captive.
अग्निं हिन्वन्तु नो धियः सप्तिमाशुमिवाजिषु|	let songs of ours speed agni forth like a fleet courser in the race.
तेन जेष्मधनंधनम|	and we will win each prize through him.
यया गा आकरामहे सेनयाग्ने तवोत्या|	agni the dart whereby we gain kine for ourselves with help from thee.
तां नो हिन्वमघत्तये|	that send us for the gain of wealth.
आग्ने सथूरं रयिं भर पर्थुं गोमन्तमश्विनम|	o agni bring us wealth secure vast wealth in horses and in kine.
अंधिखं वर्तया पणिम|	oil thou the socket turn the wheel.
अग्ने नक्षत्रमजरमा सूर्यं रोहयो दिवि|	o agni thou hast made the sun eternal star to mount the sky.
दधज्ज्योतिर्जनेभ्यः|	bestowing light on living men.
अग्ने केतुर्विशामसि परेष्ठः शरेष्ठ उपस्थसत|	thou agni art the peoples light best dearest seated in thy shrine.
बोधा सतोत्रे वयो दधत|	watch for the singer give him life.
अयमग्ने जरिता तवे अभूदपि सहसः सूनो नह्यन्यदस्त्याप्यम|	with thee o agni was this singer of the laud he hath no other kinship o thou son of strength.
भद्रं हि शर्म तरिवरूथमस्ति त आरेहिंसानामप दिद्युमा कर्धि|	thou givest blessed shelter with a triple guard keep the destructive lightning far away from us.
परवत ते अग्ने जनिमा पितूयतः साचीव विश्वा भुवना नय्र्ञ्जसे|	thy birth who seekest food is in the falling flood agni as comrade thou winnest all living things.
पर सप्तयः पर सनिषन्त नो धियः पुरश्चरन्तिपशुपा इव तमना|	our coursers and our songs shall be victorious they of themselves advance like one who guards the herd.
उत वा उ परि वर्णक्षि बप्सद बहोरग्न उलपस्य सवधावः|	and thou o agni thou of godlike nature sparest the stones while caring up the brushwood.
उत खिल्या उर्वराणां भवन्ति मा ते हेतिं तविषींचुक्रुधाम|	then are thy tracks like deserts in the cornlands let us not stir to wrath thy mighty arrow.
यदुद्वतो निवतो यासि बप्सत पर्थगेषि परगर्धिनीवसेना|	oer hills through vales devouring as thou goest thou partest like an army fain for booty.
यदा ते वातो अनुवाति शोचिर्वप्तेव शमश्रु वपसिप्र भूम|	as when a barber shaves a beard thou shavest earth when the wind blows on thy flame and fans it.
परत्यस्य शरेणयो दद्र्श्र एकं नियानं बहवो रथासः|	apparent are his lines as he approaches the course is single but the cars are many.
बाहू यदग्ने अनुमर्म्र्जानो नयंं उत्तानामन्वेषिभूमिम|	when agni thou making thine arms resplendent advancest oer the land spread out beneath thee.
उत ते शुष्मा जिहतामुत ते अर्चिरुत ते अग्ने शशमानस्यवाजाः|	now let thy strength thy burning flames fly upward thine energies o agni as thou toilest.
उच्छ्वञ्चस्व नि नम वर्धमान आ तवाद्य विश्वेवसवः सदन्तु|	gape widely bend thee waxing in thy vigour let all the vasus sit this day beside thee.
अपामिदं नययनं समुद्रस्य निवेशनम|	this is the waters reservoir the great abode of gathered streams.
अन्यंक्र्णुष्वेतः पन्थां तेन याहि वशाननु|	take thou another path than this and as thou listest walk thereon.
आयने ते परायणे दूर्वा रोहन्तु पुष्पिणिः|	on thy way hitherward and hence let flowery durva grass spring up.
हरदाश्चपुण्डरीकाणि समुद्रस्य गर्हा इमे|	let there be lakes with lotus blooms these are the mansions of the flood.
न तमंहो न दुरितं देवासो अष्ट मर्त्यम|	no peril no severe distress ye gods affects the mortal man.
सजोषसोयमर्यमा मित्रो नयन्ति वरुणो अति दविषः|	whom aryaman and mitra lead and varima of one accord beyond his foes.
तद धि वयं वर्णीमहे वरुण मित्रार्यमन|	this very thing do we desire varuṇa mitra aryaman.
येना निरंहसो यूयं पाथ नेथा च मर्त्यमति दविषः|	whereby ye guhrd the mortal man from sore distress and lead him safe beyond his foes.
ते नूनं नोअयमूतये वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	these are each one our present helps varuṇa mitra aryaman.
नयिष्था उनो नेषणि पर्षिष्ठा उ नः पर्षण्यति दविषः|	best leaders best deliverers to lead us on and bear as safe beyond our foes.
यूयं विश्वं परि पाथ वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	ye compass round and guard each man varuṇa mitra aryaman.
युष्माकंशर्मणि परिये सयाम सुप्रणीतयोअति दविषः|	in your dear keeping may we be ye who are excellent as guides beyond our foes.
आदित्यासो अति सरिधो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	Ādityas are beyond all foesvaruṇa mitra aryaman.
उग्रं मरुद्भीरुद्रं हुवेमेन्द्रमग्निं सवस्तयेअति दविषः|	strong rudra with the marut host indra agni let us call for weal beyond our foes.
नेतार ऊ षु णस्तिरो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	these lead us safely over all varuṇa mitra aryaman.
अति विश्वानिदुरिता राजानश्चर्षणीनामति दविषः|	these who are kings of living men over all troubles far away beyond our foes.
शुनमस्मभ्यमूतये वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा|	may they give bliss to aid us well varuṇa mitra aryaman.
शर्म यछन्तुसप्रथ आदित्यासो यदीमहे अति दविषः|	may the Ādityas when we pray grant us wide shelter and defence beyond our foes.
यथा ह तयद वसवो गौर्यं चित पदि षिताममुञ्चतायजत्राः|	as in this place o holy ones ye vasus freed even the gaud when her feet were fettered.
एवो षवस्मन मुञ्चता वयंहः पर तार्यग्नेप्रतरं न आयुः|	so free us now from trouble and affliction and let our life be lengthened still o api.
पिबा सोमं महत इन्द्रियाय पिबा वर्त्राय हन्तवेशविष्ठ|	drink soma juice for mighty power and vigour drink strongest one that thou mayst smite down vṛtra.
पिब राये शवसे हूयमानः पिब मध्वस्त्र्पदिन्द्रा वर्षस्व|	drink thou invoked for strength and riches drink thou thy fill of meath and pour it down o indra.
अस्य पिब कषुमतः परस्थितस्येन्द्र सोमस्य वरमासुतश्य|	drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion drink what thou choosest of the flowing soma.
सवस्तिदा मनसा मादयस्वार्वाचीनो रेवतेसौभगाय|	giver of weal be joyful in thy spirit and turn thee hitherward to bless and prosper.
ममत्तु तवा दिव्यः सोम इन्द्र ममत्तु यः सूयतेपार्थिवेषु|	let heavenly soma gladden thee o indra let that effused among mankind delight thee.
ममत्तु येन वरिवश्चकर्थ ममत्तु येननिरिणासि शत्रून|	rejoice in that whereby thou gavest freedom and that whereby thou conquerest thy foemen.
आ दविबर्हा अमिनो यात्विन्द्रो वर्षा हरिभ्यां परिषिक्तमन्धः|	let indra come impetuous doubly mighty to the poured juice the bull with two bay coursers.
गव्या सुतस्य परभ्र्तस्य मध्वः सत्रा खेदामरुशहा वर्षस्व|	with juices pressed in milk with meath presented glut evermore thy bolt o foedestroyer.
नि तिग्मानि भराशयन भराश्यान्यव सथिरा तनुहियातुजूनाम|	dash down outffaming their sharp flaming weapons the strongholds of the men urged on by demons.
उग्राय ते सहो बलं ददामि परतीत्याशत्रून विगदेषु वर्श्च|	i give thee mighty one great strength and conquest go meet thy foes and rend them in the battle.
वयर्य इन्द्र तनुहि शरवांस्योज सथिरेव धन्वनोऽभिमातीः|	extend afar the votarys fame and glory as the firm archers strength drives off the foeman.
अस्मद्र्यग वाव्र्धानः सहोभिरनिभ्र्ष्टस्तन्वं वाव्र्धस्व|	ranged on our side grown strong in might that conquers never defeated still increase thy body.
इदं हविर्मघवन तुभ्यं रातं परति सम्राळ अह्र्णानोग्र्भाय|	to thee have we presented this oblation accept it sovran ruler free from anger.
तुभ्यं सुतो मघवन तुभ्यं पक्वोअद्धीन्द्र पिबच परस्थितस्य|	juice maghavan for thee is pressed and ripened eat indra drink of that which stirs to meet thee.
अद्धीदिन्द्र परस्थितेमा हवींषि चनो दधिष्व पचतोतसोमम|	eat indra these oblations which approach thee be pleased with food made ready and with soma.
परयस्वन्तः परति हर्यामसि तवा सत्याः सन्तुयजमानस्य कामाः|	with entertainment we receive thee friendly effectual be the sacrificers wishes.
परेन्द्राग्निभ्यां सुवचस्यामियर्मि सिन्धाविव परेरयंनावमर्कैः|	i send sweet speech to indra and to agni with hymns i speed it like a boat through waters.
अया इव परि चरन्ति देवा ये अस्मभ्यन्धनदा उद्भिदश्च|	even thus the gods seem moving round about me the fountains and bestowers of our riches.
वसुं न चित्रमहसं गर्णीषे वामं शेवमतिथिमद्विषेण्यम|	i praise the god of wondrous might like indra the lovely pleasant guest whom all must welcome.
स रासते शुरुधो विश्वधायसोअग्निर्होताग्र्हपतिः सुवीर्यम|	may agni priest and master of the household give hero strength and allsustaining riches.
जुषाणो अग्ने परति हर्य मे वचो विश्वानि विद्वान वयुनानिसुक्रतो|	o agni graciously accept this song of mine thou passingwise who knowest every ordinance.
घर्तनिर्णिग बरह्मणे गातुमेरय तव देवाजनयन्ननु वरतम|	enwrapped in holy oil further the course of prayer the gods bestow according to thy holy law.
सप्त धामानि परियन्नमर्त्यो दाशद दाशुषे सुक्र्तेमामहस्व|	immortal wandering round the seven stations give a liberal giver to the pious worshipper.
सुवीरेण रयिणाग्ने सवाभुवा यस्त आनट्समिधा तं जुषस्व|	wealth agni with brave sons and ready for his use welcome the man who comes with fuel unto thee.
यज्ञस्य केतुं परथमं पुरोहितं हविष्मन्त ईळते सप्तवाजिनम|	the seven who bring oblations worship thee the strong the first the great chief priest ensign of sacrifice.
शर्ण्वन्तमग्निं घर्तप्र्ष्ठमुक्षणम्प्र्णन्तं देवं पर्णते सुवीर्यम|	the oilanointed bull agni who hears who sends as god full hero strength to him who freely gives.
टवं दूतः परथमो वरेण्यः स हूयमानो अम्र्तायमत्स्व|	first messenger art thou meet for election drink thou thy fill invited to the anirta.
तवां मर्जयन मरुतो दाशुषो गर्हे तवां सतोमेभिर्भ्र्गवो वि रुरुचुः|	the maruts in the votarys house adorned thee with lauds the bhṛgus gave thee light and glory.
इषं दुहन सुदुघां विश्वधायसं यज्ञप्रियेयजमानाय सुक्रतो|	milking the teeming cow for allsustaining food o wise one for the worshiploving worshipper.
अग्ने घर्तस्नुस्त्रिरतानि दीद्यद्वर्तिर्यज्ञं परियन सुक्रतूयसे|	thou agni dropping oil thrice lighting works of law showest thy wisdom circling home and sacrifice.
तवामिदस्या उषसो वयुष्टिषु दूतं कर्ण्वाना अयजन्तमानुषाः|	they who at flushing of this dawn appointed thee their messenger these men have paid thee reverence.
तवां देवा महयाय्याय वाव्र्धुराज्यमग्नेनिम्र्जन्तो अध्वरे|	gods strengthened thee for work that must be glorified agni while they made butter pure for sacrifice.
नि तवा वसिष्ठा अह्वन्त वाजिनं गर्णन्तो अग्ने विदथेषुवेधसः|	arrangers in our synods agni while they sang vasisistha s sons have called thee down the potent one.
रायस पोषं यजमानेषु धारय यूयं पातस्वस्तिभिः सदा नः|	maintain the growth of wealth with men who sacrifice ye gods preserve us with your blessings evermore.
सवस्ति नो दिवो अग्ने पर्थिव्या विश्वायुर्धेहि यजथाय देव|	o agni shared by all men living bring us good luck for sacrifice from earth and heaven.
सचेमहि तव दस्म परकेतैरुरुष्या ण उरुभिर्देवशंसैः|	with us be thine intelligence wonderworker protect us god with thy farreaching blessings.
इमा अग्ने मतयस्तुभ्यं जाता गोभिरश्वैरभि गर्णन्तिरधः|	these hymns brought forth for thee o agni laud thee for bounteous gifts with cattle and with horses.
यदा ते मर्तो अनु भोगमानड वसो दधानोमतिभिः सुजात|	good lord when man from thee hath gained enjoyment by hymns o noblyborn hath he obtained it.
अग्निं मन्ये पितरमग्निमापिमग्निं भरातरं सदमित्सखायम|	agni i deem my kinsman and my father count him my brother and my friend for ever.
अग्नेरनीकं बर्हतः सपर्यं दिवि शुक्रंयजतं सूर्यस्य|	i honour as the face of lofty agni in heaven the bright and holy light of sūrya.
सिध्रा अग्ने धियो अस्मे सनुत्रीर्यं तरायसे दम आनित्यहोता|	effectual agni are our prayers for profit he whom at home thou priest for ever guardest.
रतवा स रोहिदश्वः पुरुक्षुर्द्युभिरस्माहभिर्वाममस्तु|	is rich in food drawn by red steeds and holy by day and night to him shall all be pleasant.
दयुभिर्हितं मित्रमिव परयोगं परत्नं रत्विजमध्वरस्यजारम|	men with their arms have generated agni helpful as some kind friend adorned with splendours.
बाहुभ्यामग्निमायवोअजनन्त विक्षु होतारं नयसादयन्त|	and stablished as invoker mid the people the ancient priest the sacrifices lover.
सवयं यजस्व दिवि देव देवान किं ते पाकः कर्णवदप्रचेताः|	worship thyself o god the gods in heaven what void of knowledge shall the fool avail thee.
यथायज रतुभिर्देव देवानेवा यजस्वतन्वं सुजात|	as thou o god hast worshipped gods by seasons so noblyborn to thine own self pay worship.
भवा नो अग्नेअवितोत गोपा भवा वयस्क्र्दुत नोवयोधाः|	agni be thou our guardian and protector bestow upon us life and vital vigour.
रास्वा च नः सुमहो हव्यदातिं तरास्वोत नस्तन्वो अप्रयुछन|	accept o mighty one the gifts we offer and with unceasing care protect our bodies.
अग्निरिन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा वायुः पूषा सरस्वतीसजोषसः|	may agni indra mitra varuṇa consent aryaman vāyu pūṣan and sarasvatī.
आदित्या विष्णुर्मरुतः सवर्ब्र्हत सोमो रुद्रोदितिर्ब्रह्मणस पतिः|	Ādityas maruts viṣṇu soma lofty sky rudra and aditi and brahmaṇaspati.
इन्द्राग्नी वर्त्रहत्येषु सत्पती मिथो हिन्वाना तन्वासमोकसा|	indra and agni herolords when vṛtra fell dwelling together speeding emulously on.
अन्तरिक्षं मह्या पप्रुरोजसा सोमो घर्तश्रीर्महिमानमीरयन|	and soma blent with oil putting his greatness forth have with their power filled full the mighty firmament.
तेषां हि मह्ना महतामनर्वणां सतोमानियर्म्य्र्तज्ञा रताव्र्धाम|	skilled in the law i lift the hymn of praise to these lawstrengtheners unassailed and great in majesty.
ये अप्सवमर्णवं चित्रराधसस्तेनो रासन्तां महये सुमित्र्याः|	these in their wondrous bounty send the watery sea may they as kindly friends send gifts to make us great.
सवर्णरमन्तरिक्षाणि रोचना दयावाभूमी पर्थिवींस्कम्भुरोजसा|	they with their might have stayed heaven earth and prthivi the lord of light the firmament the lustrous spheres.
पर्क्षा इव महयन्तः सुरातयो देवास्तवन्ते मनुषाय सूरयः|	even as fleetfoot steeds who make their masters glad the princely gods are praised most bountiful to man.
मित्राय शिक्ष वरुणाय दाशुषे या सम्राजा मनसा नप्रयुछतः|	bring gifts to mitra and to varuṇa who lords of all in spirit never fail the worshipper.
ययोर्धाम धर्मणा रोचते बर्हद ययोरुभेरोदसी नाधसी वर्तौ|	whose statute shines on high through everlasting law whose places of sure refuge are the heavens and earth.
या गौर्वर्तनिं पर्येति निष्क्र्तं पयो दुहाना वरतनीरवारतः|	the cow who yielding milk goes her appointed way hither to us as leader of holy rites.
सा परब्रुवाणा वरुणाय दाशुषे देवेभ्योदाशद धविषा विवस्वते|	speaking aloud to varuṇa and the worshipper shall with oblation serve vivasvān and the gods.
दिवक्षसो अग्निजिह्वा रताव्र्ध रतस्य योनिं विम्र्शन्त आसते|	the gods whose tongue is agni dwell in heaven and sit aiders of law reflecting in the seat of law.
दयां सकभित्व्यप आ चक्रुरोजसा यज्ञं जनित्वीतन्वी नि माम्र्जुः|	they propped up heaven and then brought waters with their might got sacrifice and in a body made it fair.
परिक्षिता पितरा पूर्वजावरी रतस्य योना कषयतःसमोकसा|	born in the oldest time the parents dwelling round are sharers of one mansion in the home of law.
दयावाप्र्थिवी वरुणाय सव्रते घर्तवत पयोमहिषाय पिन्वतः|	bound by their common vow dyaus prthivi stream forth the moisture rich in oil to varuṇa the steer.
पर्जन्यावाता वर्षभा पुरीषिणेन्द्रवायू वरुणो मित्रोर्यमा|	parjanya vāta mighty senders of the rain indra and vāyu varuṇa mitra aryaman.
देवानादित्यानदितिं हवामहे ये पार्थिवासोदिव्यासो अप्सु ये|	we call on aditi Ādityas and the gods those who are on the earth in waters and in heaven.
तवष्टारं वायुं रभवो य ओहते दैव्या होतारा उषसंस्वस्तये|	tvaṣṭar and vāyu those who count as Ṛbhus both celestial hotarpriests and dawn for happiness.
बर्हस्पतिं वर्त्रखादं सुमेधसमिन्द्रियंसोमं धनसा उ ईमहे|	winners of wealth we call and wise bṛhaspati destroyer of our foes and soma indras friend.
बरह्म गामश्वं जनयन्त ओषधीर्वनस्पतीन पर्थिवीम्पर्वतानपः|	they generated prayer the cow the horse the plants the forest trees the earth the waters and the hills.
सूर्यं दिवि रोहयन्तः सुदानव आर्याव्रता विस्र्जन्तो अधि कषमि|	these very bounteous gods made the sun mount to heaven and spread the righteous laws of Āryas oer the land.
भुज्युमंहसः पिप्र्थो निरश्विना शयावं पुत्रंवध्रिमत्या अजिन्वतम|	o aśvins ye delivered bhujyu from distress ye animated Śyāva vadhrmatis son.
कमद्युवं विमदायोहथुर्युवंविष्णाप्वं विश्वकायाव सर्जथः|	to vimada ye brought his consort kamadyu and gave his lost viṣṇāpū back to viśvaka.
पावीरवी तन्यतुरेकपादजो दिवो धर्ता सिन्धुरापःसमुद्रियः|	thunder the lightnings daughter ajaekapād heavens bearer sindhu and the waters of the sea.
विश्वे देवासः शर्णवन वचांसि मे सरस्वतीसह धीभिः पुरन्ध्या|	hear all the gods my words sarasvatī give ear together with purandhi and with holy thoughts.
विश्वे देवाः सह धीभिः पुरन्ध्या मनोर्यजत्राम्र्ता रतज्ञाः|	with holy thoughts and with purandhi may all gods knowing the law immortal manus holy ones.
रातिषाचो अभिषाचः सवर्विदः सवर्गिरो बरह्म सूक्तं जुषेरत|	boongivers favourers finders of light and heaven with gracious love accept my songs my prayer my hymn.
देवान वसिष्ठो अम्र्तान ववन्दे ये विश्वा भुवनाभिप्रतस्थुः|	immortal gods have i vasiṣṭha lauded gods set on high above all other beings.
ते नो रासन्तामुरुगायमद्य यूयं पातस्वस्तिभिः सदा नः|	may they this day grant us wide space and freedom ye gods preserve us evermore with blessings.
बर्हस्पतिर्नयतु दुर्गहा तिरः पुनर्नेषदघशंसायमन्म|	bṚhaspati lead us safely over troubles and turn his evil thought against the sinner.
कषिपदशस्तिमप दुर्मतिं हन्नथा करद्यजमानाय शं योः|	repel the curse and drive away illfeeling and give the sacrificer peace and comfort.
नराशंसो नोअवतु परयाजे शं नो अस्त्वनुयाजो हवेषु|	may narāśaṁsa aid us at prayāja blest be our anuyāja at invokings.
कषिपदशस्तिमप दुर्मतिं हन्नथा करद यजमानायशं योः|	may he repel the curse and chase illfeeling and give the sacrificer peace and comfort.
तपुर्मूर्धा तपतु रक्षसो ये बरह्मद्विषः शरवेहन्तवा उ|	may he whose head is flaming burn the demons haters of prayer so that the arrow slay them.
कषिपदशस्तिमप दुर्मतिं हन्नथा करद्यजमानाय शं योः|	may he repel the curse and chase illfeeling and give the sacrificer peace and comfort.
तदिदास भुवनेषु जयेष्ठं यतो जज्ञ उग्रस्त्वेषन्र्म्णः|	in all the worlds that was the best and highest whence sprang the mighty gods of splendid valour.
सद्यो जज्ञानो नि रिणाति शत्रूननु यंविश्वे मदन्त्यूमाः|	as soon as born he overcomes his foemen be in whom all who lend him aid are joyful.
वाव्र्धानः शवसा भूर्योजाः शत्रुर्दासाय भियसन्दधाति|	grown mighty in his strength with ample vigour he as a foe strikes fear into the dāsa.
अव्यनच्च वयनच्च सस्नि सं ते नवन्त परभ्र्तामदेषु|	eager to win the breathing and the breathless all sang thy praise at banquet and oblation.
तवे करतुमपि वर्ञ्जन्ति विश्वे दविर्यदेते तरिर्भवन्त्यूमाः|	all concentrate on thee their mental vigour what time these twice or thrice are thine assistants.
सवादोः सवादीयः सवादुना सर्जा समदः सुमधु मधुनाभि योधीः|	blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness win quickly with our meath that meath in battle.
इति चिद धि तवा धना जयन्तं मदेमदे अनुमदन्ति विप्राः|	therefore in thee too thou who winnest riches at every banquet are the sages joyful.
ओजीयो धर्ष्णो सथिरमा तनुष्व मा तवा दभन्यातुधाना दुरेवाः|	with mightier power bold god extend thy firmness let not malignant yātudhānas harm thee.
तवया वयं शाशद्महे रणेषु परपश्यन्तो युधेन्यानिभूरि|	proudly we put our trust in thee in battles when we behold great wealth the prize of combat.
चोदयामि त आयुधा वचोभिः सं ते शिशामिब्रह्मणा वयांसि|	i with my words impel thy weapons onward and sharpen with my prayer thy vital vigour.
सतुषेय्यं पुरुवर्पसं रभ्वमिनतममाप्त्यमाप्त्यानाम|	worthy of praises manyshaped most skilful most energetic Āptya of the aptyas.
आ दर्षते शवसा सप्त दानून पर साक्षते परतिमानानिभूरि|	he with his might destroys the seven danus subduing many who were deemed his equals.
नि तद दधिषेअवरं परं च यस्मिन्नाविथावसा दुरोणे|	thou in that house which thy protection guardeth bestowest wealth the higher and the lower.
आ मातरा सथापयसे जिगत्नू अत इनोषि कर्वरा पुरूणि|	thou stablishest the two muchwandering mothers and bringest many deeds to their completion.
इमा बरह्म बर्हद्दिवो विवक्तीन्द्राय शूषमग्रियःस्वर्षाः|	brhaddiva the foremost of lightwinners repeats these holy prayers this strength of indra.
महो गोत्रस्य कषयति सवराजो दुरश्च विश्वाव्र्णोदप सवाः|	he rules the great selfluminous fold of cattle and all the doors of light hath he thrown open.
एवा महान बर्हद्दिवो अथर्वावोचत सवां तन्वमिन्द्रमेव|	thus hath brhaddiva the great atharvan spoken to indra as himself in person.
सवसारो मातरिभ्वरीररिप्रा हिन्वन्ति च शवसावर्धयन्ति च|	the spotless sisters they who are his mothers with power exalt him and impel him onward.
अप पराच इन्द्र विश्वानमित्रानपापाचो अभिभूते नुदस्व|	drive all our enemies away o indra the western mighty conqueror and the eastern.
अपोदीचो अप शूराधराच उरौ यथा तव शर्मन्मदेम|	hero drive off our northern foes and southern that we in thy wide shelter may be joyful.
कुविदङग यवमन्तो यवं चिद यथा दान्त्यनुपूर्वंवियूय|	what then as men whose fields are full of barley reap the ripe corn removing it in order.
इहेहैषां कर्णुहि भोजनानि ये बर्हिषोनमोव्र्क्तिं न जग्मुः|	so bring the food of those men bring it hither who went not to prepare the grass for worship.
नहि सथूर्य रतुथा यातमस्ति नोत शरवो विविदेसंगमेषु|	men come not with one horse at sacred seasons thus they obtain no honour in assemblies.
गव्यन्त इन्द्रं सख्याय विप्रा अश्वायन्तोव्र्षणं वाजयन्तः|	sages desiring herds of kine and horses strengthen the mighty indra for his friendship.
युवं सुराममश्विना नमुचावासुरे सचा|	ye aśvins lords of splendour drank full draughts of grateful soma juice.
विपिपानाशुभस पती इन्द्रं कर्मस्वावतम|	and aided indra in his work with namuci of asura birth.
पुत्रमिव पितरावश्विनोभेन्द्रावथुः काव्यैर्दंसनाभिः|	as parents aid a son both aśvins indra aided thee with their wondrous powers and wisdom.
यत सुरामं वयपिबः शचीभिः सरस्वतीत्वा मघवन्नभिष्णक|	when thou with might hadst drunk the draught that gladdens sarasvatī o maghavan refreshed thee.
इन्द्रः सुत्रामा सववानवोभिः सुम्र्ळीको भवतुविश्ववेदाः|	indra is strong to save rich in assistance may he possessing all be kind and gracious.
बाधतां दवेषो अभयं कर्णोतु सुवीर्यस्यपतयः सयाम|	may he disperse our foes and give us safety and may we be the lords of hero vigou r.
तस्य वयं सुमतौ यज्ञियस्यापि भद्रे सौमनसे सयाम|	may we enjoy his favour his the holy may we enjoy his blessed loving kindness.
स सुत्रामा सववानिन्द्रो अस्मे आराच्चिद दवेषः सनुतर्युयोतु|	may this rich indra as our good protector drive off and keep afar all those who hate us.
यत ते यमं वैवस्वतं मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away to yama to vivasvāns son.
तत त आवर्तयामसीह कषयाय जीवसे|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते दिवं यत पर्थिवीं मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away that passed away to earth and heaven.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते भूमिं चतुर्भ्र्ष्टिं मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away away to the fourcornered earth.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते चतस्रः परदिशो मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away to the four quarters of the world.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते समुद्रमर्णवं मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away away unto the billowy sea.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते मरीचीः परवतो मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away to beams of light that flash and flow.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते अपो यदोषधीर्मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away went to the waters and the plants.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते सूर्यं यदुषसं मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away that visited the sun and dawn.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते पर्वतान बर्हतो मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away away to lofty mountain heights.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते विश्वमिदं जगन मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away into this all that lives and moves.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते पराः परावतो मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away to distant realms beyond our ken.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn here.
यत ते भूतं च भव्यं च मनो जगाम दूरकम|	thy spirit that went far away to all that is and is to be.
तत त|	we cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and sojourn heie.
आ नो देवानामुप वेतु शंसो विश्वेभिस्तुरैरवसेयजत्रः|	may benediction of the gods approach us holy to aid us with all rapid succours.
तेभिर्वयं सुषखायो भवेम तरन्तो विश्वादुरिता सयाम|	therewith may we be happily befriended and pass triumphant over all our troubles.
परि चिन मर्तो दरविणं ममन्याद रतस्य पथा नमसाविवासेत|	a man should think on wealth and strive to win it by adoration on the path of order.
अत सवेन करतुना सं वदेत शरेयांसन्दक्षं मनसा जग्र्भ्यात|	counsel himself with his own mental insight and grasp still nobler vigour with his spirit.
अधायि धीतिरसस्र्ग्रमंशास्तीर्थे न दस्ममुपयन्त्युमाः|	the hymn is formed poured are the allotted portions as to a ford friends come unto the wondrous.
अभ्यानश्म सुवितस्य शूषं नवेदसोम्र्तानामभूम|	we have obtained the power of case and comfort we have become acquainted with immortals.
नित्यश्चाकन्यात सवपतिर्दामूना यस्मा उ देवः सवितजजान|	pleased be the eternal lord who loves the household with this man whom god savitar created.
भगो वा गोभिरर्यमेमनज्यात सो अस्मै चरुश्छदयदुत सयात|	may bhaga aryaman grace him with cattle may he appear to him and be delightful.
इयं सा भूया उषसामिव कष यद ध कषुमन्तःशवसा समायन|	like the dawns dwellingplace be this assembly where in their might men rich in food have gathered.
अस्य सतुतिं जरितुर्भिक्षमाणा आनः शग्मास उप यन्तु वाजाः|	striving to share the praises of this singer to us come strengthening and effectual riches.
अस्येदेषा सुमतिः पप्रथानाभवत पूर्व्या भुमनागौः|	this bulls most gracious farextended favour existed first of all in full abundance.
अस्य सनीळा असुरस्य योनौ समान आ भरणेबिभ्रमाणाः|	by his support they are maintained in common who in the asuras mansion dwell together.
किं सविद वनं क उ स वर्क्ष आस यतो दयावाप्र्थिवीनिष्टतक्षुः|	what was the tree what wood in sooth produced it from which they fashioned forth the earth and heaven.
सन्तस्थाने अजरे इतूती अहानि पूर्वीरुषसो जरन्त|	these twain stand fast and wax not old for ever these have sung praise to many a day and morning.
नैतावदेना परो अन्यदस्त्युक्षा स दयावाप्र्थिवीबिभर्ति|	not only here is this more is beyond us he is the bull the heavens and earths supporter.
तवदं पवित्रं कर्णुत सवधावान यदींसूर्यं न हरितो वहन्ति|	with power divine he makes his skin a filter when the bay coursers bear him on as sūrya.
सतेगो न कषामत्येति पर्थ्वीं मिहं न वातो वि हवाति भूम|	he passes oer the broad earth like a stega he penetrates the world as wind the mistcloud.
मित्रो यत्र वरुणो अज्यमानोअग्निर्वने न वयस्र्ष्ट शोकम|	he balmed with oil near varuṇa and mitra like agni in the wood hath shot forth splendour.
सतरीर्यत सूत सद्यो अज्यमाना वयथिरव्यथिः कर्णुतस्वगोपा|	when suddenly called the cow that erst was barren she selfprotected ended all her troubles.
पुत्रो यत पुर्वः पित्रोर्जनिष्ट शम्यां गौर्जगार यद ध पर्छान|	earth when the first son sprang from sire and mother cast up the gami that which men were seeking.
उत कण्वं नर्षदः पुत्रमाहुरुत शयावो धनमादत्तवाजि|	to nṛṣads son they gave the name of kainva and he the brownhued courser won the treasure.
पर कर्ष्णाय रुशदपिन्वतोधरतमत्र नकिरस्मा अपीपेत|	for him darkcoloured streamed the shining udder none made it swell for him thus order willed it.
यजामह इन्द्रं वज्रदक्षिणं हरीणां रथ्यंविव्रतानाम|	indra whose right hand wields the bolt we worship driver of bay steeds seeking sundered courses.
पर शमश्रु दोधुवदूर्ध्वथा भूद विसेनाभिर्दयमानो वि राधसा|	shaking his beard with might he hath arisen casting his weapons forth and dealing bounties.
हरी नवस्य या वने विदे वस्विन्द्रो मघैर्मघवाव्र्त्रहा भुवत|	the treasure which his bay steeds found at sacrificethis wealth made opulent indra slayer of the foe.
रभुर्वाज रभुक्षाः पत्यते शवोअवक्ष्णौमि दासस्य नाम चित|	Ṛbhu Ṛbhukṣan vājahe is lord of might the dāsas very name i utterly destroy.
यदा वज्रं हिरण्यमिदथा रथं हरी यमस्यवहतो वि सूरिभिः|	when with the princes maghavari famed of old comes nigh the thunderbolt of gold and the controllers car.
आ तिष्ठति मघवा सनश्रुत इन्द्रोवाजस्य दीर्घश्रवसस पतिः|	which his two tawny coursers draw then indra is the sovran lord of power whose glory spreads afar.
सो चिन नु वर्ष्टिर्यूथ्या सवा सचानिन्द्रः शमश्रूणिहरिताभि परुष्णुते|	with him too is this rain of his that comes like herds indra throws drops of moisture on his yellow beard.
अव वेति सुक्षयं सुते मधूदिद्धूनोति वातो यथा वनम|	when the sweet juice is shed he seeks the pleasant place and stirs the worshipper as wind disturbs the wood.
यो वाचा विवाचो मर्ध्रवाचः पुरू सहस्राशिवा जघान|	we laud and praise his several deeds of valour who fatherlike with power hath made us stronger.
तततदिदस्य पौंस्यं गर्णीमसि पितेव यस्तविषींवाव्र्धे शवः|	who with his voice slew many thousand wicked ones who spake in varied manners with contemptuous cries.
सतोमं त इन्द्र विमदा अजीजनन्नपूर्व्यं पुरुतमंसुदानवे|	indra the vimadas have formed for thee a laud copious unparalleled for thee most bountiful.
विद्मा हयस्य भोजनमिनस्य यदा पशुं नगोपाः करामहे|	we know the good we gain from him the mighty one when we attract him as a herdsman calls the kine.
माकिर्न एना सख्या वि यौशुस्तव चेन्द्र विमदस्य चर्शेः|	neer may this bond of friendship be dissevered the Ṛṣi vimadas and thine o indra.
विद्मा हि ते परमतिं देव जामिवदस्मे ते सन्तुसख्या शिवानि|	we know thou carest for us as a brother with us o god be thine auspicious friendship.
युजे वां बरह्म पूर्व्यं नमोभिर्वि शलोक एतु पथ्येवसूरेः|	i yoke with prayer your ancient inspiration may the laud rise as on the princes pathway.
शर्ण्वन्तु विश्वे अम्र्तस्य पुत्रा आ ये धामानिदिव्यानि तस्थुः|	all sons of immortality shall hear it all the possessors of celestial natures.
यमे इव यतमाने यदैतं पर वां भरन मानुषादेवयन्तः|	when speeding ye came nigh us like twin sisters religioushearted votaries brought you forward.
आ सीदतं सवमु लोकं विदाने सवासस्थेभवतमिन्दवे नः|	take your place ye who know your proper station be near be very near unto our soma.
पञ्च पदानि रुपो अन्वरोहं चतुष्पदीमन्वेमि वरतेन|	five paces have i risen from earth i follow her who hath four feet with devout observance.
अक्षरेण परति मिम एतां रतस्य नाभावधि सं पुनामि|	this by the sacred syllable have i measured i purify in the central place of order.
देवेभ्यः कमव्र्णीत मर्त्युं परजायै कमम्र्तंनाव्र्णीत|	he for gods sake chose death to be his portion he chose not for mens good a life eternal.
बर्हस्पतिं यज्ञमक्र्ण्वत रषिं परियांयमस्तन्वं परारिरेचीत|	they sacrificed bṛhaspati the Ṛṣi yama delivered up his own dear body.
सप्त कषरन्ति शिशवे मरुत्वते पित्रे पुत्रासो अप्यवीवतन्न्र्तम|	the seven flow to the youth on whom the maruts wait the sons unto the father brought the sacrifice.
उभे इदस्योभयस्य राजत उभे यतेते उभयस्यपुष्यतः|	both these are his as his they are the lords of both both toil belonging unto both they prosper well.
यस्मिन वर्क्षे सुपलाशे देवैः सम्पिबते यमः|	in the tree clothed with goodly leaves where yama drinketh with the gods.
अत्रा नोविश्पतिः पिता पुराणाननु वेनति|	the father master of the house tendeth with love our ancient sires.
पुराणाननुवेनन्तं चरन्तं पापयामुया|	i looked reluctantly on him who cherishes those men of old.
असूयन्नभ्यचाक्षं तस्मा अस्प्र्हयं पुनः|	on him who treads that evil path and then i yearned for this again.
यं कुमार नवं रथमचक्रं मनसाक्र्णोः|	thou mountest though thou dost not see o child the new and wheelless car.
एकेषंविश्वतः पराञ्चमपश्यन्नधि तिष्ठसि|	which thou hast fashioned mentally onepoled but turning every way.
यं कुमार परावर्तयो रथं विप्रेभ्यस परि|	the car which thou hast made to roll hitherward from the sages child.
तंसामानु परावर्तत समितो नाव्याहितम|	this hath the sāman followed close hence laid together on a ship.
कः कुमारमजनयद रथं को निरवर्तयत|	who was the father of the child who made the chariot roll away.
कः सवित तदद्य नो बरूयादनुदेयी यथाभवत|	who will this day declare to us how the funeral gift was made.
यथाभवदनुदेयी ततो अग्रमजायत|	when the funeral gift was placed straightway the point of flame appeared.
पुरस्ताद बुध्नाततः पश्चान निरयणं कर्तम|	a depth extended in the front a passage out was made behind.
इदं यमस्य सादनं देवमानं यदुच्यते|	here is the seat where yama dwells that which is called the home of gods.
इयमस्यधम्यते नाळीरयं गीर्भिः परिष्क्र्तः|	here minstrels blow the flute for him here he is glorified with songs.
उत देवा अवहितं देवा उन नयथा पुनः|	ye gods raise up once more the man whom ye have humbled and brought low.
उतागश्चक्रुषं देवा देवा जीवयथा पुनः|	o gods restore to life again the man who hatb committed sin.
दवाविमौ वातौ वात आ सिन्धोरा परावतः|	two several winds are blowing here from sindhu from a distant land.
दक्षन्ते अन्य आ वातु परान्यो वातु यद रपः|	may one breathe energy to thee the other blow disease away.
आ वात वाहि भेषजं वि वात वाहि यद रपः|	hither o wind blow healing balm blow all disease away thou wind.
तवं हिविश्वभेषजो देवानां दूत ईयसे|	for thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of the gods.
आ तवागमं शन्तातिभिरथो अरिष्टतातिभिः|	i am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee rest and keep thee safe.
दक्षन्ते भद्रमाभार्षं परा यक्ष्मं सुवामि ते|	i bring thee blessed strength i drive thy weakening malady away.
तरायन्तामिह देवास्त्रायतां मरुतां गणः|	here let the gods deliver him the maruts band deliver him.
तरायन्तां विश्वा भूतानि यथायमरपा असत|	all things that be deliver him that he be freed from his disease.
आप इद वा उ भेषजीरापो अमीवचातनीः|	the waters have their healing power the waters drive disease away.
आपःसर्वस्य भेषजीस्तास्ते कर्ण्वन्तु भेषजम|	the waters have a balm for all let them make medicine for thee.
हस्ताभ्यां दशशाखा भयां जिह्वा वाचः पुरोगवी|	the tongue that leads the voice precedes then with our tenfold branching hands.
अनामयित्नुभ्यां तवा तभ्यां तवोप सप्र्शामसि|	with these two chasers of disease we stroke thee with a gentle touch.
अग्रे बर्हन्नुषसामूर्ध्वो अस्थान निर्जगन्वान तमसोज्योतिषागात|	high hath the mighty risen before the dawning and come to us with light from out the darkness.
अग्निर्भानुना रुशता सवङग आ जातोविश्वा सद्मान्यप्राः|	fairshapen agni with whiteshining splendour hath filled at birth all human habitations.
स जातो गर्भो असि रोदस्योरग्ने चारुर्विभ्र्त ओषधीषु|	thou being born art child of earth and heaven parted among the plants in beauty agni.
चित्रः शिशुः परि तमांस्यक्तून पर मात्र्भ्यो अधिकनिक्रदत गाः|	the glooms of night thou brilliant babe subduest and art come forth loud roaring from thy mothers.
विष्णुरित्था परममस्य विद्वाञ जातो बर्हन्नभि पातित्र्तीयम|	here being manifested lofty viṣṇu full wise protects his own supremest station.
आसा यदस्य पयो अक्रत सवं सचेतसो अभ्यर्चन्त्यत्र|	when they have offered in his mouth their sweet milk to him with one accord they sing forth praises.
अत उ तवा पितुभ्र्तो जनित्रीरन्नाव्र्धं परति चरन्त्यन्नैः|	thence bearing food the mothers come to meet thee with food for thee who givest food its increase.
ता ईं परत्येषि पुनरन्यरूपा असि तवं विक्षुमानुषीषु होता|	these in their altered form again thou meetest thou art invoking priest in homes of mortals.
होतारं चित्ररथमध्वरस्य यज्ञस्ययज्ञस्य केतुंरुशन्तम|	priest of the holy rite with car that glitters refulgent banner of each act of worship.
परत्यर्धिं देवस्यदेवस्य मह्ना शरिया तवग्निमतिथिं जनानाम|	sharinging every god through might and glory even agni guest of men i summon hither.
स तु वस्त्राण्यध पेशनानि वसानो अग्निर्नाभाप्र्थिव्याः|	so agni stands on earths most central station invested in welldecorated garments.
अरुषो जातः पद इळायाः पुरोहितो राजन्यक्षीह देवान|	born red of hue where men pour out libations o king as great high priest bring the gods hither.
आ हि दयावाप्र्थिवी अग्न उभे सदा पुत्रो न मातराततन्थ|	over the earth and over heaven o agni thou son hast ever spread above thy parents.
पर याह्यछोशतो यविष्ठाथा वह सहस्येहदेवान|	come youthfullest to those who long to meet thee and hither bring the gods o mighty victor.
अहं रुद्रेभिर्वसुभिश्चराम्यहमादित्यैरुतविश्वदेवैः|	i travel with the rudras and the vasus with the Ādityas and allgods i wander.
अहं मित्रावरुणोभा बिभर्म्यहमिन्द्राग्नीहमश्विनोभा|	i hold aloft both varuṇa and mitra indra and agni and the pair of aśvins.
अहं सोममाहनसं बिभर्म्यहं तवष्टारमुतपूषणं भगम|	i cherish and sustain highswelling soma and tvaṣṭar i support pūṣan and bhaga.
अहं दधामि दरविणं हविष्मतेसुप्राव्ये यजमानाय सुन्वते|	i load with wealth the zealous sdcrificer who pours the juice and offers his oblation.
अहं राष्ट्री संगमनी वसूनां चिकितुषी परथमायज्ञियानाम|	i am the queen the gathererup of treasures most thoughtful first of those who merit worship.
तां मा देवा वयदधुः पुरुत्राभूरिस्थात्रां भूर्यावेशयन्तीम|	thus gods have stablished me in many places with many homes to enter and abide in.
मया सो अन्नमत्ति यो विपश्यति यः पराणिति य ईंश्र्णोत्युक्तम|	through me alone all eat the food that feeds themeach man who sees brewhes hears the word outspoken.
अमन्तवो मां त उप कषियन्ति शरुधिश्रुत शरद्धिवं ते वदामि|	they know it not but yet they dwell beside me hear one and all the truth as i declare it.
अहमेव सवयमिदं वदामि जुष्टं देवेभिरुतमानुषेभिः|	verily myself announce and utter the word that gods and men alike shall welcome.
यं कामये तंतमुग्रं कर्णोमि तम्ब्रह्माणं तं रषिं तं सुमेधाम|	i make the man i love exceeding mighty make him a sage a Ṛṣi and a brahman.
अहं रुद्राय धनुरा तनोमि बरह्मद्विषे शरवे हन्तवाु|	i bend the bow for rudra that his arrow may strike and slay the hater of devotion.
अहं जनाय समदं कर्णोम्यहं दयावाप्र्थिवी आविवेश|	i rouse and order battle for the people and i have penetrated earth and heaven.
अहं सुवे पितरमस्य मूर्धन मम योनिरप्स्वन्तः समुद्रे|	on the worlds summit i bring forth the father my home is in the waters in the ocean.
ततो वि तिष्ठे भुवनानु विश्वोतामूं दयांवर्ष्मणोप सप्र्शामि|	thence i extend oer all existing creatures and touch even yonder heaven with my forehead.
अहमेव वात इव पर वाम्यारभमाणा भुवनानि विश्वा|	i breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest the while i hold together all existence.
परो दिवा पर एना पर्थिव्यैतावती महिना सं बभूव|	beyond this wide earth and beyond the heavens i have become so mighty in my grandeur.
पर सु व आपो महिमानमुत्तमं कारुर्वोचाति सदनेविवस्वतः|	the singer o ye waters in vivasvāns place shall tell your grandeur forth that is beyond compare.
पर सप्तसप्त तरेधा हि चक्रमुः परस्र्त्वरीणामति सिन्धुरोजसा|	the rivers have come forward triply seven and seven sindhu in might surpasses all the streams that flow.
पर तेअरदद वरुणो यातवे पथः सिन्धो यद वाजानभ्यद्रवस्त्वम|	varuṇa cut the channels for thy forward course o sindhu when thou rannest on to win the race.
भूम्या अधि परवता यासि सानुना यदेषामग्रं जगतामिरज्यसि|	thou speedest oer precipitous ridges of the earth when thou art lord and leader of these moving floods.
दिवि सवनो यतते भूम्योपर्यनन्तं शुष्ममुदियर्तिभानुना|	his roar is lifted up to heaven above the earth he puts forth endless vigour with a flash of light.
अभ्रादिव पर सतनयन्ति वर्ष्टयः सिन्धुर्यदेति वर्षभो न रोरुवत|	like floods of rain that fall in thunder from the cloud so sindhu rushes on bellowing like a bull.
अभि तवा सिन्धो शिशुमिन न मातरो वाश्रा अर्षन्तिपयसेव धेनवः|	like mothers to their calves like milch kine with their milk so sindhu unto thee the roaring rivers run.
राजेव युध्वा नयसि तवमित सिचौ यदासामग्रं परवतामिनक्षसि|	thou leadest as a warrior king thine armys wings what time thou comest in the van of these swift streams.
इमं मे गङगे यमुने सरस्वति शुतुद्रि सतेमं सचता परुष्ण्या|	favour ye this my laud o gangā yamunā o sutudri paruṣṇī and sarasvatī.
असिक्न्या मरुद्व्र्धे वितस्तयार्जीकीये शर्णुह्यासुषोमया|	with asikni vitasta o marudvrdha o Ārjīkīya with susoma hear my call.
तर्ष्टामया परथमं यातवे सजूः ससर्त्वा रसयाश्वेत्या तया|	first with trstama thou art eager to flow forth with rasā and susartu and with svetya here.
तवं सिन्धो कुभया गोमतीं करुमुम्मेहत्न्वा सरथं याभिरीयसे|	with kubha and with these sindhu and mehatnu thou seekest in thy course krumu and gomati.
रजीत्येनी रुशती महित्वा परि जरयांसि भरते रजांसि|	flashing and whitelygleaming in her mightiness she moves along her ample volumes through the realms.
अदब्धा सिन्धुरपसामपस्तमाश्वा न चित्रावपुषीव दर्शता|	most active of the active sindhu unrestrained like to a dappled mare beautiful fair to see.
सवश्वा सिन्धुः सुरथा सुवासा हिरण्ययी सुक्र्तावाजिनीवती|	rich in good steeds is sindhu rich in cars and robes rich in gold noblyfashioned rich in ample wealth.
ऊर्णावती युवतिः सीलमावत्युताधि वस्तेसुभगा मधुव्र्धम|	blest silamavati and young urnavati invest themselves with raiment rich in store of sweets.
सुखं रथं युयुजे सिधुरश्विनं तेन वाजं सनिषदस्मिन्नाजौ|	sindhu hath yoked her car lightrolling drawn by steeds and with that car shall she win booty in this fight.
महान हयस्य महिमा पनस्यतेअदब्धस्यस्वयशसो विरप्शिनः|	so have i praised its power mighty and unrestrained of independent glory roaring as it runs.
इमां खनाम्योषधिं वीरुधं बलवत्तमाम|	from out the earth i dig this plant a herb of most effectual power.
ययासपत्नीं बाधते यया संविन्दते पतिम|	wherewith one quells the rival wife and gains the husband for oneself.
उत्तानपर्णे सुभगे देवजूते सहस्वति|	auspicious with expanded leaves sent by the gods victorious plant.
सपत्नीं मे पराधम पतिं मे केवलं कुरु|	blow thou the rival wife away and make my husband only mine.
उत्तराहमुत्तर उत्तरेदुत्तराभ्यः|	stronger am  o stronger one yea mightier than the mightier.
अथा सपत्नी याममाधरा साधराभ्यः|	and she who is my rival wife is lower than the lowest dames.
नह्यस्या नाम गर्भ्णामि नो अस्मिन रमते जने|	her very name i utter not she takes no pleasure in this man.
परामेवपरावतं सपत्नीं गमयामसि|	far into distance most remote drive we the rival wife away.
अहमस्मि सहमानाथ तवमसि सासहिः|	i am the conqueror and thou thou also act victorious.
उभे सहस्वतीभूत्वी सपत्नीं मे सहावहै|	as victory attends us both we will subdue my fellowwife.
उप तेअधां सहमानामभि तवाधां सहीयसा|	i have gained thee for vanquisher have grasped thee with a stronger spell.
मामनुप्र ते मनो वत्सं गौरिव धावतु पथा वारिव धावतु|	as a cow hastens to her calf so let thy spirit speed te me hasten like water on its way.
इमं नो अग्न उप यज्ञमेहि पञ्चयामं तरिव्र्तंसप्ततन्तुम|	come to this sacrifice of ours o agni threefold with seven threads and five divisions.
असो हव्यवाळ उत नः पुरोगा जयोगेवदीर्घं तम आशयिष्ठाः|	be our oblationbearer and preceder thou hast lain long enough in during darkness.
अदेवाद देवः परचता गुहा यन परपश्यमानो अम्र्तत्वमेमि|	i come a god foreseeing from the godless to immortality by secret pathways.
शिवं यत सन्तमशिवो जहामि सवात सख्यादरणींनाभिमेमि|	while i ungracious one desert the gracious leave mine own friends and seek the kin of strangers.
पश्यन्नन्यस्या अतिथिं वयाया रतस्य धाम वि मिमेपुरूणि|	looking to the guest of other lineage have founded many a rule of law and order.
शंसामि पित्रे असुराय शेवमयज्ञियाद्यज्ञियं भागमेमि|	i bid farewell to the great god the father and for neglect obtain my share of worship.
बह्वीः समा अकरमन्तरस्मिन्निन्द्रं वर्णानः पितरंजहामि|	i tarried many a year within this altar i leave the father for my choice is indra.
अग्निः सोमो वरुणस्ते चयवन्ते पर्यावर्द्राष्ट्रं तदवाम्यायन|	away pass agni varuṇa and soma rule ever changes this i come to favour.
निर्माया उ तये असुरा अभूवन तवं च मा वरुण कामयासे|	these asuras have lost their powers of magic but thou o varuṇa if thou dost love me.
रतेन राजन्नन्र्तं विविञ्चन मम राष्ट्रस्याधिपत्यमेहि|	o king discerning truth and right from falsehood come and be lord and ruler of my kingdom.
इदं सवरिदमिदास वाममयं परकाश उर्वन्तरिक्षम|	here is the light of heaven here allis lovely here there is radiance here is airs wide region.
हनाव वर्त्रं निरेहि सोम हविष टवा सन्तं हविषायजाम|	let us two slaughter vṛtra forth o soma thou art oblation we therewith will serve thee.
कविः कवित्वा दिवि रूपमासजदप्रभूती वरुणो निरपः सर्जत|	the sage hath fixed his form by wisdom in the heavens varuṇa with no violence let the waters flow.
कषेमं कर्ण्वाना जनयो न सिन्धवश ता अस्यवर्णं शुचयो भरिभ्रति|	like womenfolk the floods that bring prosperity have eau lit his hue and colour as they gleamed and shone.
ता अस्य जयेष्ठमिन्द्रियं सचन्ते ता ईमा कषेतिस्वधया मदन्तीः|	these wait upon his loftiest power and vigour he dwells in these who triumph in their godhead.
ता इं विशो न राजानं वर्णानाबीभत्सुवो अप वर्त्रादतिष्ठन|	and they like people who elect their ruler have in abhorrence turned away from vṛtra.
बीभत्सूनां सयुजं हंसमाहुरपां दिव्यानांसख्ये चरन्तम|	they call him swan the abhorrent floods companion moving in friendship with celestial waters.
अनुष्टुभमनु चर्चूर्यमाणमिन्द्रं निचिक्युः कवयो मनीषा|	the poets in their thought have looked on indra swiftly approaching when anustup calls him.
इन्द्र सोममिमं पिब मधुमन्तं चमू सुतम|	o indra drink this soma pressed out in the mortar full of sweets.
अस्मे रयिंनि धारय वि वो मदे सहस्रिणं पुरूवसो विवक्षसे|	send down to us great richesat your glad carousein thousands o most healthy thou art waxing great.
तवां यज्ञेभिरुक्थैरुप हव्येभिरीमहे|	to thee with sacrifices with oblations and with lauds we come.
शचीपतेशचीनां वि वो मदे शरेष्ठं नो धेहि वार्यं विवक्षसे|	lord of all strength and power grantat your glad carousethe best choiceworthy treasure thou art waxing great.
यस पतिर्वार्याणामसि रध्रस्य चोदिता|	thou who art lord of precious boons inciter even of the churl.
इन्द्रस्तोतॄणामविता वि वो मदे दविषो नः पाह्यंहसोविवक्षसे|	guardian of singers indraat your glad carousesave us from woe and hatred thou art waxing great.
युवं शक्रा मायाविना समीची नीरमन्थतम|	strong lords of magic power ye twain churned the united worlds apart.
विमदेनयदिळित नसत्य निरमन्थतम|	when ye implored by vimada nāsatyas forced apart the pair.
विश्वे देवा अक्र्पन्त समिच्योर्निष्पतन्त्योः|	when the united pair were rent asunder all the gods complained.
नसत्यवब्रुवन्देवः पुनरा वहतदिति|	the gods to the nāsatyas cried bring these together once again.
मधुमन मे परायणं मधुमत पुनरयनम|	sweet be my going forth and rich in sweets be my approach to home.
त नो देवदेवतय युवं मधुमतस कर्तम|	so through your deity both gods enrich us with all pleasantness.
संसमिद युवसे वर्षन्नग्ने विश्वान्यर्य आ|	thou mighty agni gatherest up all that is precious for thy friend.
इळस पदेसमिध्यसे स नो वसून्या भर|	bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled in libations place.
सं गछध्वं सं वदध्वं सं वो मनांसि जानताम|	assemble speak together let your minds be all of one accord.
देवा भागं यथा पूर्वे संजानाना उपासते|	as ancient gods unanimous sit down to their appointed share.
समानो मन्त्रः समितिः समानी समानं मनः सह चित्तमेषाम|	the place is common common the assembly common the mind so be their thought united.
समानं मन्त्रमभि मण्त्रये वः समानेन वोहविषा जुहोमि|	a common purpose do i lay before you and worship with your general oblation.
समानी व आकूतिः समाना हर्दयानि वः|	one and the same be your resolve and be your minds of one accord.
समानमस्तु वोमनो यथा वः सुसहासति|	united be the thoughts of all that all may happily agree.
एकः समुद्रो धरुणो रयीणामस्मद धर्दो भूरिजन्मा विचष्टे|	he only is the sea holder of treasures born many a time he views the hearts within us.
सिषक्त्यूधर्निण्योरुपस्थ उत्सस्य मध्येनिहितं पदं वेः|	he hides him in the secret couples bosom the bird dwells in the middle of the fountain.
समानं नीळं वर्षणो वसानाः सं जग्मिरे महिषार्वतीभिः|	inhabiting one dwellingplace in common strong stallions and the mares have come together.
रतस्य पदं कवयो नि पान्ति गुहा नामानिदधिरे पराणि|	the sages guard the seat of holy order and keep the highest names concealed within them.
रतायिनी मायिनी सं दधाते मित्वा शिशुं जज्ञतुर्वर्धयन्ती|	the holy pair of wondrous power have coupled they formed the infant they who bred produced him.
विश्वस्य नाभिं चरतो धरुवस्य कवेश्चित्तन्तुं मनसा वियन्तः|	the central point of all that moves and moves not the while they wove the sages thread with insight.
रतस्य हि वर्तनयः सुजातमिषो वाजाय परदिवःसचन्ते|	for tracks of order and refreshing viands attend from ancient times the goodly infant.
अधीवासं रोदसी वावसाने घर्तैरन्नैर्वाव्र्धाते मधूनाम|	wearing him as a mantle earth and heaven grow strong by food of pleasant drink and fatness.
सप्त सवसॄररुषीर्वावशानो विद्वान मध्व उज्जभाराद्र्शे कम|	he calling loudly to the seven red sisters hath skilled in sweet drink brought them to be looked on.
अन्तर्येमे अन्तरिक्षे पुराजा इछन वव्रिमविदत्पूषणस्य|	he born of old in middle air hath halted and sought and found the covering robe of pūṣan.
सप्त मर्यादाः कवयस्ततक्षुस्तासामेकामिदभ्यंहुरो गात|	seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned to one of these may come the troubled mortal.
आयोर्ह सकम्भ उपमस्य नीळे पथांविसर्गे धरुणेषु तस्थौ|	he standeth in the dwelling of the highest a pillar on sure ground where paths are parted.
असच्च सच्च परमे वयोमन दक्षस्य जन्मन्नदितेरुपस्थे|	not being being in the highest heaven in aditis bosom and in dakṣas birthplace.
अग्निर्ह नः पर थमजा रतस्य पूर्व आयुनि वर्षभश्चधेनुः|	is agni our firstborn of holy order the milchcow and the bull in lifes beginning.
भद्रं नो अपि वातय मनो दक्षमुत करतुम|	send us a good and happy mind send energy and mental power.
अधा तेसख्ये अन्धसो वि वो मदे रणन गवो न यवसे विवक्षसे|	thenat your glad carouselet men joy in thy love sweet juice as kine in pasture thou art waxing great.
हर्दिस्प्र्शस्त असते विश्वेषु सोम ध मसु|	rn all thy forms o soma rest thy powers that influence the heart.
अधा कामा इमेमम वि वो मदे वि तिष्ठन्ते वसूयवो विवक्षसे|	so also these my longingsat your glad carousespread themselves seeking riches thou art waxing great.
उत वरतनि सोम ते परहं मिनामि पाक्या|	even if o soma i neglect thy laws through my simplicity.
अधा पितेवसूनवे वि वो मदे मर्ळ नो अभि चिद वधाद विवक्षसे|	be graciousat your glad carouseas sire to son preserve us even from slaughter thou art waxing great.
समु पर यन्ति धीतयः सर्गासोअवतानिव|	our songs in concert go to thee as streams of water to the wells.
करतुं नःसोम जिवसे वि वो मदे धरया चमसानिव विवक्षसे|	soma that we may live grantat your glad carousefull powers of mind like beakers thou art waxing great.
तव तये सोम शक्तिभिर्निकामासो वय रण्विरे|	o soma through thy might who art skilful and strong these longing men.
गर्त्सस्यधिरस्तवसो वि वो मदे वरजं गोमन्तमश्विनं विवक्षसे|	these sages have thrown openat your glad carousethe stall of kine and horses thou art waxing great.
पशुं नः सोम रक्षसि पुरुत्र विष्ठितं जगत|	our herds thou guardest soma and the moving world spread far and wide.
समाक्र्णोषि जीवसे वि वो मदे विश्वा सम्पश्यन भुवनविवक्षसे|	thou fittest them for livingat your glad carouselooking upon all beings thou art waxing great.
तवं नः सोम विश्वतो गोप अदभ्यो भव|	on all sides soma be to us a guardian neer to be deceived.
सेध राजन्नपस्रिधो वि वो मदे म नो दुः शंस ईशता विवक्षसे|	king drive away our foemenat your glad carouselet not the wicked rule us thou art waxing great.
तवं नः सोम सुक्रतुर्व योधेयाय जाग्र्हि|	be watchful soma passing wise to give us store of vital strength.
कषेत्रवित्तरोमनुषो वि वो मदे दरुहो नः पाह्यंहसो विवक्षसे|	more skilled than man to guide usat your glad carousesave us from harm and sorrow thou art waxing great.
तवं नो वर्त्र हन्तमेन्द्रस्येन्दो शिवः सखा|	chief slayer of our foemen thou indu art indras gracious friend.
यत सिंहवन्ते समिथे वि वो मदे युध्यमनस्तोकसातौविवक्षसे|	when warriors invoke himat your glad carouse in fight to win them offspring thou art waxing great.
अयं घ स तुरो मद इन्द्रस्य वर्धत परियः|	victorious is this gladdening drink to indra dear it grows in strength.
अयंकक्षीवतो महो वि वो मदे मतिं विप्रस्य वर्धयद्विवक्षसे|	thisat your glad carouse enhanced the mighty hymn of the great sage kakṣīvān thou art waxing great.
अयं विप्रय दशुषे वजनियर्ति गोमतः|	this to the sage who offers gifts brings power that comes from wealth in kine.
अयंसप्तभ्य आ वरं वि वो मदे परन्धं शरोणं चतरिषद विवक्षसे|	this better than the seven hathat your glad carousefurthered the blind the cripple thou art waxing great.
आ तवाहार्षमन्तरेधि धरुवस्तिष्ठाविचाचलिः|	be with us i have chosen thee stand stedfast and immovable.
विशस्त्वा सर्वा वाञ्छन्तु मा तवद राष्ट्रमधि भरशत|	let all the people wish for thee let not thy kingship fall away.
इहैवैधि माप चयोष्ठाः पर्वत इवाविचाचलिः|	be even here fall not away be like a mountain unremoved.
इन्द्रैवेह धरुवस्तिष्ठेह राष्ट्रमु धारय|	stand stedfast here like indras self and hold the kingship in the grasp.
इममिन्द्रो अदीधरद धरुवं धरुवेण हविषा|	this man hath indra stablished made secure by strong oblations power.
तस्मै सोमोधि बरवत तस्मा उ बरह्मणस पतिः|	may soma speak a benison and brahmaṇaspati on him.
धरुवा दयौर्ध्रुवा पर्थिवी धरुवासः पर्वता इमे|	firm is the sky and firm the earth and stedfast also are these hills.
धरुवं विश्वमिदं जगद धरुवो राजा विशामयम|	stedfast is all this living world and stedfast is this king of men.
धरुवं ते राजा वरुणो धरुवं देवो बर्हस्पतिः|	stedfast may varuṇa the king stedfast the god bṛhaspati.
धरुवं त इन्द्रश्चाग्निश्च राष्ट्रं धारयतां धरुवम|	stedfast may indra stedfast too may agni keep thy stedfast reign.
धरुवं धरुवेण हविषाभि सोमं मर्शामसि|	on constant soma let us think with constant sacrificial gift.
अथो तैन्द्रः केवलीर्विशो बलिह्र्तस करत|	and then may indra make the clans bring tribute unto thee alone.
इति वा इति मे मनो गामश्वं सनुयामिति|	this even this was my resolve to win a cow to win a steed.
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
पर वाता इव दोधत उन मा पीता अयंसत|	like violent gusts of wind the draughts that i have drunk have lifted me.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
उन मा पीता अयंसत रथमश्वा इवाशवः|	the draughts i drank have borne me up as fleetfoot horses draw a car.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
उप मा मतिरस्थित वाश्रा पुत्रमिव परियम|	the hymn hath reached me like a cow who lows to meet her darling calf.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
अहं तष्टेव वन्धुरं पर्यचामि हर्दा मतिम|	as a wright bends a chariotseat so round my heart i bend the hymn.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
नहि मे अक्षिपच्चनाछान्त्सुः पञ्च कर्ष्टयः|	not as a mote within the eye count the five tribes of men with me.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
नहि मे रोदसी उभे अन्यं पक्षं चन परति|	the heavens and earth themselves have not grown equal to one half of me.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
अभि दयां महिना भुवमभीमां पर्थिवीं महीम|	i in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens and all this spacious earth.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
हन्ताहं पर्थिवीमिमां नि दधानीह वेह वा|	aha this spacious earth will i deposit either here or there.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
ओषमित पर्थिवीमहं जङघनानीह वेह वा|	in one short moment will i smite the earth in fury here or there.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
दिवि मे अन्यः पक्षोअधो अन्यमचीक्र्षम|	one of my flanks is in the sky i let the other trail below.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
अहमस्मि महामहोअभिनभ्यमुदीषितः|	greatest of the mighty ones am lifted to the firmament.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
गर्हो याम्यरंक्र्तो देवेभ्यो हव्यवाहनः|	i seek the worshippers abode oblationbearer to the gods.
कुवित|	have i not drunk of soma juice.
उभे यदिन्द्र रोदसी आपप्राथोषा इव|	as like the morning thou hast filled o indra both the earth and heaven.
महान्तं तवामहीनां सम्राजं चर्षणीनां देवी जनित्र्यजीजनद्भद्रा जनित्र्यजीजनत|	so as the mighty one great king of all the mighty world of men the goddess mother brought thee forth the blessed mother gave thee life.
अव सम दुर्हणायतो मर्तस्य तनुहि सथिरम|	relax that mortals stubborn strength whose heart is bent on wickedness.
अधस्पदं तमीं कर्धि यो अस्मानादिदेशति देवी जनित्र्यजीजनद भद्राजनित्र्यजीजनत|	trample him down beneath thy feet who watches for and aims at us the goddess mother brought thee forth the blessed mother gave thee life.
अव तया बर्हतीरिषो विश्वश्चन्द्रा अमित्रहन|	shake down o slayer of the foe those great all splendid enemies.
शचीभिःशक्र धूनुहीन्द्र विश्वाभिरूतिभिर्देवी जनित्र्य|	with all thy powers o Śakra all thine helps o indra shake them down.
अव यत तवं शतक्रतविन्द्र विश्वानि धूनुषे|	as thou o Śatakratu thou o indrv shakest all things down.
रयिंन सुन्वते सचा सहस्रिणीभिरूतिभिर्देवी जनित्र्य|	as wealth for him who sheds the juice with thine assistance thousandfold.
अव सवेदा इवाभितो विष्वक पतन्तु दिद्यवः|	around on every side like drops of sweat let lightningflashes fall.
दूर्वाया इवतन्तवो वयस्मदेतु दुर्मतिर्देवी जनीत्र्य|	let all malevolence pass away from us like threads of darva grass.
दीर्घं हयङकुशं यथा शक्तिं बिभर्षि मन्तुमः|	thou bearest in thine hand a lance like a long hook great counsellor.
पूर्वेण मघवन पदाजो वयां यथा यमो देवी जनित्र्य|	as with his foremost foot a goat draw down the branch o maghavan.
नकिर्देवा मिनीमसि नकिरा योपयामसि मन्त्रश्रुत्यंचरामसि|	never o gods do we offend nor are we ever obstinate we walk as holy texts command.
पक्षेभिरपिकक्षेभिरत्राभि सं रभामहे|	closely we clasp and cling to you cling to your sides beneath your arms.
सविता यन्त्रैः पर्थिवीमरम्णादस्कम्भने सविता दयामद्रंहत|	savitar fixed the earth with bands to bind it and made heaven stedfast where no prop supported.
अश्वमिवाधुक्षद धुनिमन्तरिक्षमतूर्तेबद्धं सविता समुद्रम|	savitar milked as twere a restless courser air sea bound fast to what no foot had trodden.
यत्रा समुद्र सकभितो वयौनदपां नपात सविता तस्यवेद|	well knoweth savitar o child of waters where ocean firmly fixt oerflowed its limit.
अतो भूरत आ उत्थितं रजोअतो दयावाप्र्थिवीप्रथेताम|	thence sprang the world from that uprose the region thence heaven spread out and the wide earth expanded.
पश्चेदमन्यदभवद यजत्रममर्त्यस्य भुवनस्य भूना|	then with a full crowd of immortal beings this other realm came later high and holy.
सुपर्णो अङग सवितुर्गरुत्मान पूर्वो जातः स उ अस्यानुधर्म|	first verily savitars strongpinioned eagle was born and he obeys his law for ever.
गाव इव गरामं यूयुधिरिवाश्वान वाश्रेव वत्संसुमना दुहाना|	as warriors to their steeds kine to their village as fond milk giving cows approach their youngling.
पतिरिव जायामभि नो नयेतु धर्तादिवः सविता विश्ववारः|	as man to wife let savitar come downward to us heavens bearer lord of every blessing.
हिरण्यस्तूपः सवितर्यथा तवाङगिरसो जुह्वे वाजे अस्मिन|	like the aṅgirasa hiranvastupa i call thee savitar to this achievement.
एवा तवार्चन्नवसे वन्दमानः सोमस्येवाण्शुं परतिजागराहम|	so worshipping and lauding thee for favour i watch for thee as for the stalk of soma.
रक्षोहणं वाजिनमा जिघर्मि मित्रं परथिष्ठमुपयामि शर्म|	i balm with oil the mighty rakṣasslayer to the most famous friend i come for shelter.
शिशानो अग्निः करतुभिः समिद्धः स नोदिवा स रिषः पातु नक्तम|	enkindled sharpened by our rites may agni protect us in the day and night from evil.
अयोदंष्ट्रो अर्चिषा यातुधानानुप सप्र्श जातवेदःसमिद्धः|	o jātavedas with the teeth of iron enkindled with thy flame attack the demons.
आ जिह्वया मुरदेवान रभस्व करव्यादो वर्क्त्व्यपि धत्स्वासन|	seize with thy longue the foolish gods adorers rend put within thy mouth the rawflesh caters.
उभोभयाविन्नुप धेहि दंष्ट्रा हिंस्रः शिशानोअवरम्परं च|	apply thy teeth the upper and the lower thou who hast both enkindled and destroying.
उतान्तरिक्षे परि याहि राजञ जम्भैः सन्धेह्यभि यातुधानान|	roam also in the air o king around us and with thy jaws assail the wicked spirits.
यज्ञैरिषूः संनममानो अग्ने वाचा शल्यानशनिभिर्दिहानः|	bending thy shafts through sacrifices agni whetting their points with song as if with whetstones.
ताभिर्विध्य हर्दये यातुधानान परतीचो बाहून्प्रति भंध्येषाम|	pierce to the heart therewith the yātudhānas and break their arms uplifed to attack thee.
अग्ने तवचं यातुधानस्य भिन्धि हिंस्राशनिर्हरसाहन्त्वेनम|	pierce through the yātudhānas skin o agni let the destroying dart with fire consume him.
पर पर्वाणि जातवेदः शर्णीहि करव्यात्क्रविष्णुर्वि चिनोतु वर्क्णम|	rend his joints jātavedas let the cater of flesh fleshseeking track his mangled body.
यत्रेदानीं पश्यसि जातवेदस्तिष्ठन्तमग्न उत वाचरन्तम|	where now thou seest agni jātavedas one of these demons standing still or roaming.
यद वान्तरिक्षे पथिभिः पतन्तं तमस्ताविध्य शर्वा शिशानः|	or flying on those paths in airs midregion sharpen the shaft and as an archer pierce him.
उतालब्धं सप्र्णुहि जातवेद आलेभानाद रष्टिभिर्यातुधानात|	tear from the evil spirit jātavedas what he hath seized and with his spears hath captured.
अग्ने पूर्वो नि जहि शोशुचान आमादःक्ष्विङकास्तमदन्त्वेनीः|	blazing before him strike him down o agni let spotted carrioneating kites devour him.
इह पर बरूहि यतमः सो अग्ने यो यातुधानो य इदंक्र्णोति|	here tell this forth o agni whosoever is he himself or acteth as a demon.
तमा रभस्व समिधा यविष्ठ नर्चक्षसश्चक्षुषे रन्धयैनम|	him grasp o thou most youthful with thy fuel to the matiseers eye give him as booty.
तीक्ष्णेनाग्ने चक्षुषा रक्ष यज्ञं पराञ्चं वसुभ्यःप्र णय परचेतः|	with keen glance guard the sacrifice o agni thou sage conduct it onward to the vasus.
हिंस्रं रक्षांस्यभि शोशुचानम्मा तवा दभन यातुधाना नर्चक्षः|	let not the fiends o manbeholder harm thee burning against the rākṣasas to slay them.
नर्चक्षा रक्षः परि पश्य विक्षु तस्य तरीणि परतिश्र्णीह्यग्रा|	look on the fiend mid men as manbeholder rend thou his three extremities in pieces.
तस्याग्ने पर्ष्टीर्हरसा शर्णीहि तरेधामूलं यातुधानस्य वर्श्च|	demolish with thy flame his ribs o agni the yātudhānas root destroy thou triply.
तरिर्यातुधानः परसितिं त एत्व रतं यो अग्ने अन्र्तेन हन्ति|	thrice agni let thy noose surround the demon who with his falsehood injures holy order.
तमर्चिषा सफूर्जयञ जातवेदः समक्षमेनं गर्णतेनि वरंधि|	loud roaring with thy flame o jātavedas crush him and cast him down before the singer.
तदग्ने चक्षुः परति धेहि रेभे शफारुजं येनपश्यसि यातुधानम|	lead thou the worshipper that eye o agni wherewith thou lookest on the hoofarmed demon.
अथर्ववज्ज्योतिषा दैव्येन सत्यन्धूर्वन्तमचितं नयोष|	with light celestial in atharvans manner burn up the foot who ruins truth with falsehood.
यदग्ने अद्य मिथुना शपातो यद वाचस्त्र्ष्टं जनयन्तरेभाः|	agni what curse the pair this day have uttered what heated word the worshippers have spoken.
मन्योर्मनसः शरव्या जायते या तया विध्यह्र्दये यातुधानान|	each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spiritpierce to the heart therewith the yātudhānas.
परा शर्णीहि तपसा यातुधानान पराग्ने रक्षो हरसाश्र्णीहि|	with fervent heat exterminate the demons destroy the fiends with burning flame o agni.
परार्चिषा मूरदेवाञ्छ्र्णीहि परासुत्र्पो अभिशोशुचानः|	destroy with fire the foolish gods adorers blaze and destrepy the insatiable monsters.
पराद्य देवा वर्जिनं शर्णन्तु परत्यगेनं शपथा यन्तुत्र्ष्टाः|	may gods destroy this day the evildoer may each hot curse of his return and blast him.
वाचास्तेनं शरव रछन्तु मर्मन विश्वस्यैतुप्रसितिं यातुधानः|	let arrows pierce the liar in his vitals and visvas net enclose the yātudhāna.
यः पौरुषेयेण करविषा समङकते यो अश्वेयेन पशुनायातुधानः|	the fiend who smears himself with flesh of cattle with flesh of horses and of human bodies.
यो अघ्न्याया भरति कषीरमग्ने तेषांशीर्षाणि हरसापि वर्श्च|	who steals the milchcows milk away o agnitear off the heads of such with fiery fury.
संवत्सरीणं पय उस्रियायास्तस्य माशीद यातुधानोन्र्चक्षः|	the cow gives milk each year o manregarder let not the yātudhāna ever taste it.
पीयूषमग्ने यतमस्तित्र्प्सात तं परत्यञ्चमर्चिषा विध्य मर्मन|	if one would glut him with the biesting agni pierce with thy flame his vitals as he meets thee.
विषं गवां यातुधानाः पिबन्त्वा वर्श्च्यन्तामदितयेदुरेवाः|	let the fiends drink the poison of the cattle may aditi cast off the evildoers.
परैनान देवः सविता ददातु परा भागमोषधीनां जयन्ताम|	may the god savitar give them up to ruin and be their share of plants and herbs denied them.
सनादग्ने मर्णसि यातुधानान न तवा रक्षांसि पर्तनासुजिग्युः|	agni from days of old thou slayest demons never shall rākṣasas in fight oercome thee.
अनु दह सहमूरान करव्यादो मा ते हेत्या मुक्षतदैव्यायाः|	burn up the foolish ones the fleshdevourers let none of them escape thine heavenly arrow.
तवं नो अग्ने अधरादुदक्तात तवं पश्चादुत रक्षापुरस्तात|	guard us o agni from above and under protect us flom behind us and before us.
परति ते ते अजरासस्तपिष्ठा अघशंसंशोशुचतो दहन्तु|	and may thy flames most fierce and never wasting glowing with fervent heat consume the sinner.
पश्चात पुरस्तादधरादुदक्तात कविः काव्येन परि पाहिराजन|	from rear from front from under from above us o king protect us as a sage with wisdom.
सखे सखायमजरो जरिम्णेअग्ने मर्तानमर्त्यस्त्वं नः|	guard to old age thy friend o friend eternal o agni as immortal guard us mortals.
परि तवाग्ने पुरं वयं विप्रं सहस्य धीमहि|	we set thee round us as a fort victorious agni thee a sage.
धर्षद्वर्णं दिवेदिवे हन्तारं भङगुरावताम|	of hero lineage day by day destroyer of our treacherous foes.
विषेण भङगुरावतः परति षम रक्षसो दह|	burn with thy poison turned against the treacherous brood of rākṣasas.
अग्नेतिग्मेन शोचिषा तपुरग्राभिरषटिभिः|	o agni with thy sharpened glow with lances armed with points of flame.
परत्यग्ने मिथुन दह यातुधाना किमीदिना|	burn thou the paired kimīdins brun agni the yātudhāna pairs.
सं तवाशिशामि जाब्र्ह्यदब्धं विप्र मन्मभिः|	i sharpen thee infallible with hymns o sage be vigilant.
परत्यग्ने हरसा हरः शर्णीहि विश्वतः परति|	shoot forth o agni with thy flame demolish them on every side.
यातुधानस्य रक्षसो बलं वि रुज वीर्यम|	break thou the yātudhānas strength the vigour of the rākṣasa.
तयं चिदत्रिं रतजुरमर्थमश्वं न यातवे|	ye made that atri worn with eld free as a horse to win the goal.
कक्षिवन्तं यदी पुना रथं न कर्णुथो नवम|	when ye restored to youth and strength kakṣīvān like a car renewed.
तयं चिदश्वं न वाजिनमरेणवो यमत्नत|	ye freed that atri like a horse and brought him newlyborn to earth.
दर्ळंग्रन्थिं न वि षयतमत्रिं यविष्ठमा रजः|	ye loosed him like a firmtied knot which gods unsoiled by dust had bound.
नरा दंसिष्ठवत्रये शुभ्रा सिषासतं धियः|	heroes who showed most wondrous power to atri strive to win fair songs.
अथा हि वां दिवो नरा पुन सतोमो न विशसे|	for then o heroes of the sky your hymn of praise shall cease no more.
चिते तद वां सुराधसा रातिः सुमतिरश्विना|	this claims your notice bounteous gods  oblation aśvins and our love.
आ यन्नः सदने पर्थौ समने पर्षथो नरा|	that ye o heroes in the fight may bring us safe to ample room.
युवं भुज्युं समुद्र आ रजसः पार ईङखितम|	ye twain to bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the regions end.
यातमछा पतत्रिभिर्नासत्या सातये कर्तम|	nāsatyas with your winged sterds came nigh and gave him strength to win.
आ वां सुम्नैः शम्यू इव मंहिष्ठा विश्ववेदसा|	come with your joys most liberal gods lords of all treasures bringing weal.
समस्मे भूषतं नरोत्सं न पिप्युषीरिषः|	like fresh full waters to a well so heroes come and be with us.
पिप्रीहि देवानुशतो यविष्ठ विद्वान रतून्रतुपतेयजेह|	gladden the yearning gods o thou most youthful bring them o lord of seasons knowing seasons.
ये दैव्या रत्विजस्तेभिरग्ने तवं होतॄणामस्यायजिष्ठः|	with all the priests celestial o agni best worshipper art thou of all invokers.
वेषि होत्रमुत पोत्रं जनानां मन्धातासि दरविणोदार्तावा|	thine is the heralds thine the cleansers office thinker art thou wealthgiver true to order.
सवाहा वयं कर्णवामा हवींषि देवो देवान्यजत्वग्निरर्हन|	let us with svāhā offer up oblations and agni worthy god pay the gods worship.
आ देवानामपि पन्थामगन्म यच्छक्नवाम तदनुप्रवोळुम|	to the gods pathway have we travelled ready to execute what work we may accomplish.
अग्निर्विद्वान स यजात सेदु होता सो अध्वरांस रतून कल्पयाति|	let agni for he knows complete the worship he is the priest let him fix rites and seasons.
यद वो वयं परमिनाम वरतानि विदुषं देवाविदुष्टरासः|	when we most ignorant neglect the statutes of you o deities with whom is knowledge.
अग्निष टद विश्वमा पर्णाति विद्वान्येभिर्देवान रतुभिः कल्पयाति|	wise agni shall correct our faults and failings skilled to assign each god his fitting season.
यत पाकत्रा मनसा दीनदक्षा न यज्ञस्य मन्वतेमर्त्यासः|	when weak in mind of feeble understanding mortals bethink them not of sacrificing.
अग्निष टद धोता करतुविद विजानन्यजिष्ठो देवान रतुशो यजाति|	then shall the prudent and discerning agni worship the gods best worshipper in season.
विश्वेषां हयध्वराणामनीकं चित्रं केतुं जनितात्वा जजान|	because the father hath produced thee leader of all our solemn rites their brilliant banner.
स आ यजस्व नर्वतीरनु कषा सपार्हािषः कषुमतीर्विश्वजन्याः|	so win by worship pleasant homes abounding in heroes and rich food to nourish all men.
यं तवा दयावाप्र्थिवी यं तवापस्त्वष्टा यं तवासुजनिमा जजान|	thou whom the heaven and earth thou whom the waters and tvaṣṭar maker of fair things created.
पन्थामनु परविद्वान्पित्र्याणं दयुमदग्ने समिधानो वि भाहि|	well knowing all along the fathers pathway shine with resplendent light enkindled agni.
केश्यग्निं केशी विषं केशी बिभर्ति रोदसी|	he with the long loose locks supports agni and moisture heaven and earth.
केशीविश्वं सवर्द्र्शे केशीदं जयोतिरुच्यते|	he is all sky to look upon he with long hair is called this light.
मुनयो वातरशनाः पिशङगा वसते मला|	the munis girdled with the wind wear garments soiled of yellow hue.
वातस्यानुध्राजिं यन्ति यद देवासो अविक्षत|	they following the winds swift course go where the gods have gone before.
उन्मदिता मौनेयन वाताना तस्थिमा वयम|	transported with our munihood we have pressed on into the winds.
शरीरेदस्माकं यूयं मर्तासो अभि पश्यथ|	you therefore mortal men behold our natural bodies and no more.
अन्तरिक्षेण पतति विश्वा रूपावचाकशत|	the muni made associate in the holy work of every god.
मुनिर्देवस्यदेवस्य सौक्र्त्याय सखा हितः|	looking upon all varied forms flies through the region of the air.
वातस्याश्वो वायोः सखाथो देवेषितो मुनिः|	the steed of vāta vāyus friend the muni by the gods impelled.
उभौसमुद्रावा कषेति यश्च पूर्व उतापरः|	in both the oceans hath his home in eastern and in western sea.
अप्सरसां गन्धर्वाणां मर्गाणां चरणे चरन|	treading the path of sylvan beasts gandharvas and apsarases.
केशीकेतस्य विद्वान सखा सवादुर्मदिन्तमः|	he with long locks who knows the wish is a sweet most delightful friend.
वायुरस्मा उपामन्थत पिनष्टि समा कुनन्नमा|	vāyu hath churned for him for him he poundeth things most hard to bend.
केशीविषस्य पात्रेण यद रुद्रेणापिबत सह|	when he with long loose locks hath drunk with rudra water from the cup.
इनो राजन्नरतिः समिद्धो रौद्रो दक्षाय सुषुमानदर्शि|	o king the potent and terrific envoy kindled for strength is manifest in beauty.
चिकिद वि भाति भासा बर्हतासिक्नीमेति रुशतीमपाजन|	he shines allknowing with his lotty splendour chasing black night he comes with whiterayed morning.
कर्ष्णां यदेनीमभि वर्पसा भूज्जनयन योषाम्ब्र्हतः पितुर्जाम|	having oercome the glimmering black with beauty and bringing forth the dame the great sires daughter.
ऊर्ध्वं भानुं सूर्यस्य सतभायन्दिवो वसुभिररतिर्वि भाति|	holding aloft the radiant light of sūrya as messenger of heaven he shines with treasures.
भद्रो भद्रया सचमान आगात सवसारं जारो अभ्येतिपश्चात|	attendant on the blessed dame the blessed hath come the lover followeth his sister.
सुप्रकेतैर्द्युभिरग्निर्वितिष्ठन रुशद्भिर्वर्णैरभि राममस्थात|	agni farspreading with conspicuous lustre hath compassed night with whitelyshining garments.
अस्य यामासो बर्हतो न वग्नूनिन्धाना अग्नेः सख्युःशिवस्य|	his goingsforth kindle as twere high voices the goings of the auspicious friend of agni.
इड्यस्य वर्ष्णो बर्हतः सवासो भामासो यामन्नक्तवश्चिकित्रे|	the rays the bright beams of the strongjawed mighty adorable steer are visible as he cometh.
सवना न यस्य भामासः पवन्ते रोचमानस्य बर्हतःसुदिवः|	whose radiant splendours flow like sounds about us his who is lofty brilliant and effulgent.
जयेष्ठेभिर्यस्तेजिष्ठैः करीळुमद्भिर्वर्षिष्ठेभिर्भानुभिर्नक्षति दयाम|	who reaches heaven with best and brightest lustres sportive and piercing even to the summit.
अस्य शुष्मासो दद्र्शानपवेर्जेहमानस्य सवनयन नियुद्भिः|	his powers whose chariot fellies gleam and glitter have loudly roared while as with teams he hasted.
परत्नेभिर्यो रुशद्भिर्देवतमो वि रेभद्भिररतिर्भाति विभ्वा|	he the most godlike farextending envoy shines with flames ancient resonant whitelyshining.
स आ वक्षि महि न आ च सत्सि दिवस्प्र्थिव्योररतिर्युवत्योः|	so bring us ample wealth seat thee as envoy of the two youthful matrons earth and heaven.
अग्निः सुतुकः सुतुकेभिरश्वै रभस्वद्भीरभस्वानेह गम्याः|	let agni rapid with his rapid horses impetuous with impetuous steeds come hither.
तुभ्येदमिन्द्र परि षिच्यते मधु तवं सुतस्य कलशस्यराजसि|	this pleasant meath o indra is effused for thee thou art the ruling lord of beaker and of juice.
तवं रयिं पुरुवीरामु नस कर्धि तवं तपःपरितप्याजयः सवः|	bestow upon us wealth with many hero sons thou having glowed with fervour wonnest heavenly light.
सवर्जितं महि मन्दानमन्धसो हवामहे परि शक्रंसुतानुप|	let us call Śakra to libations here effused winner of light who joyeth in the potent juice.
इमं नो यज्ञमिह बोध्या गहि सप्र्धोजयन्तं मघवानमीमहे|	mark well this sacrifice of ours and come to us we pray to maghavan the vanquisher of hosts.
सोमस्य राज्ञो वरुणस्य धर्मणि बर्हस्पतेरनुमत्या उशर्मणि|	by royal somas and by varuṇas decree under bṛhaspatis and anumatis guard.
तवाहमद्य मघवन्नुपस्तुतौ धातर्विधातः कलशानभक्षयम|	this day by thine authority o maghavan maker disposer thou have i enjoyed the jars.
परसूतो भक्षमकरं चरावपि सतोमं चेमं परथमःसूरिरुन मर्जे|	too urged on have had my portion in the bowl and as first prince i drew forth this my hymn of praise.
सुते सातेन यद्यागमं वां परतिविश्वामित्रजमदग्नी दमे|	when with the prize i came unto the flowing juice o viśvāmitra jamadagni to your home.
अग्ने हंसि नयत्रिणं दीद्यन मर्त्येष्वा|	agni refulgent among men thou slayest the devouring fiend.
सवे कषयेशुचिव्रत|	bright ruler in thine own abode.
उत तिष्ठसि सवाहुतो घर्तानि परति मोदसे|	thou springest up when worshipped well the drops of butter are thy joy.
यत तवा सरुचःसमस्थिरन|	when ladies are brought near to thee.
स आहुतो वि रोचतेअग्निरीळेन्यो गिरा|	honoured with gifts he shines afar agni adorable with song.
सरुचा परतीकमज्यते|	the dripping ladle balms his face.
घर्तेनाग्निः समज्यते मधुप्रतीक आहुतः|	agni with honey in his mouth honoured with gifts is balmed with oil.
रोचमानोविभावसुः|	refulgent in his wealth of light.
जरमाणः समिध्यसे देवेभ्यो हव्यवाहन|	praised by our hymns thou kindlest thee oblationbearer for the gods.
तं तवा हवन्तमर्त्याः|	as such do mortals call on thee.
तं मर्ता अमर्त्यं घर्तेनाग्निं सपर्यत|	to that immortal agni pay worship with oil ye mortal men.
अदाभ्यंग्र्हपतिम|	lord of the house whom none deceives.
अदाभ्येन शोचिषाग्ने रक्षस्त्वं दह|	o agni burn the rākṣasas with thine unconquerable flame.
गोपा रतस्यदीदिहि|	shine guardian of eternal law.
स तवमग्ने परतीकेन परत्योष यातुधान्यः|	so agni with thy glowing face burn fierce against the female fiends.
उरुक्षयेषुदीद्यत|	shining among uruksayas.
तं तवा गीर्भिरुरुक्षया हव्यवाहं समीधिरे|	uruksayas have kindled thee oblationbearer thee with hymns.
यजिष्ठं मानुषे जने|	best worshipper among mankind.
विश्वे देवाः शास्तन मा यथेह होता वर्तो मनवै यन्निषद्य|	instruct me all ye gods how i elected your priest must seat me here and how address you.
पर मे बरूत भागधेयं यथा वो येन पथाहव्यमा वो वहानि|	instruct me how to deal to each his portion and by what  path to bring you mans oblation.
अहं होता नयसीदं यजीयान विश्वे देवा मरुतो माजुनन्ति|	i sit as priest most skilled in sacrificing the maruts and all deities impel me.
अहरअहरश्विनाध्वर्यवं वां बरह्मा समिद भवतिसाहुतिर्वाम|	aśvins each day yours is the adhvaryus duty brahman and wood are here tis yours to offer.
अयं यो होता किरु स यमस्य कमप्यूहे यत समञ्जन्तिदेवाः|	who is the priest is he the priest of yama on whom is thrust this godappointed honour.
अहरअहर्जायते मासिमास्यथा देवा दधिरेहव्यवाहम|	he springs to life each month each day that passes so gods have made him their oblationbearer.
मां देवा दधिरे हव्यवाहमपम्लुक्तं बहु कर्छ्राचरन्तम|	the gods have made me bearer of oblations who slipped away and passed through many troubles.
अग्निर्विद्वान यज्ञं नः कल्पयाति पञ्चयामन्त्रिव्र्तं सप्ततन्तुम|	wise agni shall ordain for us the worship whether fivewayed threefold or seventhreaded.
आ वो यक्ष्यम्र्तत्वं सुवीरं यथा वो देवा वरिवःकराणि|	so will i win you strength and life for ever o gods that i may give you room and freedom.
आ बाह्वोर्वज्रमिन्द्रस्य धेयामथेमाविश्वाः पर्तना जयाति|	to indras arms would i consign the thunder in all these battles shall he then be victor.
तरीणि शता तरी सहस्राण्यग्निं तरिंशच्च देवा नवचासपर्यन|	the deities three hundred and thirtynine have served and honoured agni.
औक्षन घर्तैरस्त्र्णन बर्हिरस्मा आदिद्धोतारं नयसादयन्त|	strewn sacred grass anointed him with butter and seated him as priest the gods invoker.
ममाग्ने वर्चो विहवेष्वस्तु वयं तवेन्धानास्तन्वम्पुषेम|	let me win glory agni in our battles enkindling thee may we support our bodies.
मह्यं नमन्तां परदिशश्चतस्रस्त्वयाध्यक्षेणप्र्तना जयेम|	may the four regions bend and bow before me with thee for guardian may we win in combat.
मम देवा विहवे सन्तु सर्व इन्द्रवन्तो मरुतो विष्णुरग्निः|	may all the gods be on my side in battle the maruts led by indra viṣṇu agni.
ममान्तरिक्षमुरुलोकमस्तु मह्यं वातः पवतांकामे अस्मिन|	mine be the middle airs extended region and may the wind blow favouring these my wishes.
मयि देवा दरविणमा यजन्तां मय्याशीरस्तु मयिदेवहूतिः|	may the gods grant me riches may the blessing and invocation of the gods assist me.
दैव्या होतारो वनुषन्त पूर्वेअरिष्टाःस्याम तन्वा सुवीराः|	foremost in fight be the divine invokers may we unwounded have brave heroes round us.
मह्यं यजन्तु मम यानि हव्याकूतिः सत्या मनसो मे अस्तु|	for me let them present all mine oblations and let my minds intention be accomplished.
एनो मा नि गां कतमच्चनाहं विश्वे देवासो अधिवोचता नः|	may i he guiltless of the least transgression and all ye gods do ye combine to bless us.
देवीः षळ उर्वीरुरु नः कर्णोत विश्वे देवास इहवीरयध्वम|	ye six divine expanses grant us freedom here all ye gods acquit yourselves like heroes.
मा हास्महि परजया मा तनूभिर्मा रधामद्विषते सोम राजन|	let us not lose our children or our bodies let us not benefit the foe king soma.
अग्ने मन्युं परतिनुदन परेषामदब्धो गोपाः परि पाहि नस्त्वम|	baffling the wrath of our opponents agni guard us as our infallible protector.
परत्यञ्चो यन्तु निगुतः पुनस्तेअमैषां चित्तम्प्रबुधां वि नेशत|	let these thy foes turn back and seek their houses and let their thought who watch at home be ruined.
धाता धातॄणां भुवनस्य यस पतिर्देवं तरातारमभिमातिषाहम|	lord of the world creator of creators the saviour god who overcomes the foeman.
इमं यज्ञमश्विनोभा बर्हस्पतिर्देवाः पान्तु यजमानं नयर्थात|	may gods bṛhaspati both aśvins shelter from ill this sacrifice and sacrificer.
उरुव्यचा नो महिषः शर्म यंसदस्मिन हवे पुरुहूतःपुरुक्षुः|	foodful and muchinvoked at this our calling may the great bull vouchsafe us wide protection.
स नः परजायै हर्यश्व मर्ळयेन्द्र मा नोरीरिषो मा परा दाः|	lord of bay coursers indra blew our children harm us not give us not as prey to others.
ये नः सपत्ना अप ते भवन्त्विन्द्राग्निभ्यामव बाधामहेतान|	let those who are our foemen stay afar from us with indra and with agni we will drive them off.
वसवो रुद्रा आदित्या उपरिस्प्र्शं मोग्रं चेत्तारमधिराजमक्रन|	vasus Ādityas rudras have exalted me made me farreaching mighty thinker sovran lord.
अयं हि ते अमर्त्य इन्दुरत्यो न पत्यते|	this deathless indu like a steed strong and of full vitality.
दक्षो विश्वायुर्वेधसे|	belongs to thee the orderer.
अयमस्मासु काव्य रभुर्वज्रो दास्वते|	here by us for the worshipper is the wise bolt that works with skill.
अयं बिभर्त्यूर्ध्वक्र्शनं मदं रभुर्न कर्त्व्यं मदम|	it brings the bubbling beverage as a dexterous man brings the effectual strong drink.
घर्षुः शयेनाय कर्त्वन आसु सवासु वंसगः|	impetuous ahīśuva a bull among cows of his.
अव दीधेदहीशुवः|	looked down upon the restless hawk.
यं सुपर्णः परावतः शयेनस्य पुत्र आभरत|	that the strongpinioned bird hath brought child of the falcon from afar.
शतचक्रं योअह्यो वर्तनिः|	what moves upon a hundred wheels along the female dragons path.
यं ते शयेनश्चारुमव्र्कं पदाभरदरुणं मानमन्धसः|	which fair unrobbed the falcon brought thee in his foot the redhued dwelling of the juice.
एना वयो वि तार्यायुर्जीवस एना जागारबन्धुता|	through this came vital power which lengthens out our days and kinship through its help awoke.
एवा तदिन्द्र इन्दुना देवेषु चिद धारयाते महि तयजः|	so indra is by lndus power een among gods will it repel great treachery.
करत्वा वयो वि तार्यायुः सुक्रतो करत्वायमस्मदासुतः|	wisdom most sapient one brings force that lengthens life may wisdom bring the juice to us.
ओ चित सखायं सख्या वव्र्त्यां तिरः पुरू चिदर्णवंजगन्वन|	fain would i win my friend to kindly friendship so may the sage come through the airs wide ocean.
पितुर्नपातमा दधीत वेधा अधि कषमिप्रतरं दिध्यानः|	remembering the earth and days to follow obtain a son the issue of his father.
न ते सखा सख्यं वष्ट्येतत सलक्ष्मा यद विषुरूपाभवाति|	thy friend loves not the friendship which considers her who is near in kindred as stranger.
महस पुत्रसो असुरस्य वीरा दिवो धर्तारौर्विया परि खयन|	sons of the mighty asura the heroes supporters of the heavens see far around them.
उशन्ति घा ते अम्र्तास एतदेकस्य चित तयजसं मर्त्यस्य|	yea this the immortals seek of thee with longing progeny of the sole existing mortal.
नि ते मनो मनसि धाय्यस्मे जन्युः पतिस्तन्वमाविविश्याः|	then let thy soul and mine be knit together and as a loving husband take thy consort.
न यत पुरा चक्र्मा कद ध नूनं रता वदन्तो अन्र्तंरपेम|	shall we do now what we neer did aforetime we who spake righteously now talk impurely.
गन्धर्वो अप्स्वप्या च योषा सा नो नाभिःपरमं जामि तन नौ|	gandharva in the floods the dame of waterssuch is our bond such our most lofty kinship.
गर्भे नु नौ जनिता दम्पती कर्देवास्त्वष्टा सविताविश्वरूपः|	even in the womb god tvaṣṭar vivifier shaping all forms creator made us consorts.
नाकिरस्य पर मिनन्ति वरतानि वेद नावस्यप्र्थिवि उत दयौः|	none violates his holy ordinances that we are his the heavens and earth acknowledge.
को अस्य वेद परथमस्याह्नः क ईं ददर्श क इह परवोचत|	who knows that earliest day whereof thou speakest who hatb beheld it who can here declare it.
बर्हन मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धाम कदु बरव आहनोवीच्या नॄन|	great is the law of varuṇa and mitra what wanton wilt thou say to men to tempt them.
यमस्य मा यम्यं काम आगन समाने योनौ सहशेय्याय|	i yami am possessed by love of yama that i may rest on the same couch beside him.
जायेव पत्ये तन्वं रिरिच्यां वि चिद वर्हेव रथ्येव चक्रा|	i as a wife would yield me to my husband like carwheels let us speed to meet each other.
न तिष्ठन्ति न नि मिषन्त्येते देवानां सपश इह येचरन्ति|	they stand not still they never close their eyelids those sentinels of gods who wander round us.
अन्येन मदाहनो याहि तुयं तेन वि वर्ह रथ्येवचक्रा|	not mego quickly wanton with another and hasten like a chariot wheel to meet him.
रात्रीभिरस्मा अहभिर्दशस्येत सूर्यस्य चक्षुर्मुहुरुन्मिमीयात|	may sūryas eye with days and nights endow him and ever may his light spread out before him.
दिवा पर्थिव्या मिथुना सबन्धू यमीर्यमस्यबिभ्र्यादजामि|	in heaven and earth the kindred pair commingle on yam be the unbrotherly act of yama.
आ घा ता गछानुत्तरा युगानि यत्र जामयः कर्णवन्नजामि|	sure there will come succeeding times when brothers and sisters will do acts unmeet for kinsfolk.
उप बर्ब्र्हि वर्षभाय बाहुमन्यमिछस्व सुभगेपतिं मत|	not me o fair oneseek another husband and make thine arm a pillow for thy consort.
किं भरतासद यदनाथं भवाति किमु सवसा यन निरतिर्निगछत|	is he a brother when no lord is left her is she a sister when destruction cometh.
काममूता बह्वेतद रपामि तन्वा मे तन्वं सम्पिप्र्ग्धि|	forced by my love these many words i utter come near and hold me in thy close embraces.
न वा उ ते तन्वा तन्वं सं पप्र्च्यां पापमाहुर्यःस्वसारं निगछात|	i will not fold mine arms about thy body they call it sin when one comes near his sister.
अन्येन मत परमुदः कल्पयस्व न तेभ्रात सुभगे वष्ट्येतत|	not meprepare thy pleasures with another thy brother seeks not this from thee o fair one.
बतो बतसि यम नैव ते मनो हर्दयं चाविदाम|	alas thou art indeed a weakling yama we find in thee no trace of heart or spirit.
अन्या किलत्वां कक्ष्येव युक्तं परि षवजाते लिबुजेव वर्क्षम|	as round the tree the woodbine clings another will cling albout thee girt as with a girdle.
अन्यमू षु तवं यम्यन्य उ तवां परि षवजाते लिबुजेवव्र्क्षम|	embrace another yami let another even as the woodbine rings the tree enfold thee.
तस्य वा तवं मन इछा स वा तवाधा कर्णुष्वसंविदं सुभद्राम|	win thou his heart and let him win thy fancy and he shall form with thee a blest alliance.
आविरभून महि माघोनमेषां विश्वं जीवं तमसो निरमोचि|	these mens great bounty hath been manifested and the whole world of life set free from darkness.
महि जयोतिः पित्र्भिर्दत्तमागादुरुः पन्थादक्षिणाया अदर्शि|	great light hath come vouchsafed us by the fathers apparent is the spacious path of guerdon.
उच्चा दिवि दक्षिणावन्तो अस्थुर्ये अश्वदाः सह तेसूर्येण|	high up in heaven abide the guerdongivers they who give steeds dwell with the sun for ever.
हिरण्यदा अम्र्तत्वं भजन्ते वासोदाः सोम परतिरन्त आयुः|	they who give gold are blest with life eternal they who give robes prolong their lives o soma.
दैवी पूर्तिर्दक्षिणा देवयज्या न कवारिभ्यो नहि तेप्र्णन्ति|	not from the niggardsfor they give not fireelycomes meed at sacrifice gods satisfaction.
अथा नरः परयतदक्षिणासोअवद्यभियाबहवः पर्णन्ति|	yea many men with hands stretched out with guerdon present their gifts because they dread dishonour.
शतधारं वायुमर्कं सवर्विदं नर्चक्षसस्ते अभिचक्षते हविः|	these who observe mankind regard oblation as streamy vāyu and lightfinding arka.
ये पर्णन्ति पर च यछन्ति संगमे तेदक्षिणां दुहते सप्तमातरम|	they satisfy and give their gifts in synod and pour in streams the sevenmothered guerdon.
दक्षिणावान परथमो हूत एति दक्षिणावान गरामणीरग्रमेति|	he who brings guerdon comes as first invited chief of the hamlet comes the guerdonbearer.
तमेव मन्ये नर्पतिं जनानां यः परथमोदक्षिणामाविवाय|	him i account the ruler of the people who was the first to introduce the guerdon.
तमेव रषिं तमु बरह्माणमाहुर्यज्ञन्यं सामगामुक्थशासम|	they call him Ṛṣi brahman sāmachanter reciter of the laud leader of worship.
स शुक्रस्य तन्वो वेद तिस्रो यः परथमोदक्षिणया रराध|	the brightlyshining gods three forms he knoweth who first bestowed the sacrificial guerdon.
दक्षिणाश्वं दक्षिणा गां ददाति दक्षिणा चन्द्रमुत यद धिरण्यम|	guerdon bestows the horse bestows the bullock guerdon bestows moreover gold that rsisters.
दक्षिणान्नं वनुते यो न आत्मादक्षिणां वर्म कर्णुते विजानन|	guerdon gives food which is our life and spirit he who is wise takes guerdon for his armour.
न भोजा मम्रुर्न नयर्थमीयुर्न रिष्यन्ति न वयथन्ते हभोजाः|	the liberal die not never are they ruined the liberal suffer neither harm nor trouble.
इदं यद विश्वं भुवनं सवश्चैतत सर्वन्दक्षिणैभ्यो ददाति|	the light of heaven the universe about usall this doth sacrificial guerdon give them.
भोजा जिग्युः सुरभिं योनिमग्रे भोजा जिग्युर्वध्वं यासुवासाः|	first have the liberal gained a fragrant dwelling and got themselves a bride in fair apparel.
भोजा जिग्युरन्तःपेयं सुराया भोजा जिग्युर्ये अहूताः परयन्ति|	the liberal have obtained their draught of liquor and conquered those who unprovoked assailed them.
भोजायाश्वं सं मर्जन्त्याशुं भोजायास्ते कन्याशुम्भमाना|	they deck the fleet steed for the bounteous giver the maid adorns herself and waits to meet him.
भोजस्येदं पुष्करिणीव वेश्म परिष्क्र्तन्देवमानेव चित्रम|	his home is like a lake with lotus blossoms like the gods palaces adorned and splendid.
भोजमश्वाः सुष्ठुवाहो वहन्ति सुव्र्द रथो वर्ततेदक्षिणायाः|	steeds good at draught convey the liberal giver and lightly rolling moves the car of guerdon.
भोजं देवासोअवता भरेषु भोजःशत्रून समनीकेषु जेता|	assist ye gods the liberal man in battles the liberal giver conquers foes in combat.
पर ससाहिषे पुरुहूत शत्रूञ जयेष्ठस्ते शुष्म इहरातिरस्तु|	o muchinvoked thou hast subdued thy foemen thy might is loftiest here display thy bounty.
इन्द्रा भर दक्षिणेना वसूनि पतिःसिन्धूनामसि रेवतीनाम|	in thy right hand o indra bring us treasures thou art the lord of rivers filled with riches.
मर्गो न भीमः कुचरो गिरिष्ठाः परावत आ जगन्थापरस्याः|	like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain thou hast approached us from the farthest distance.
सर्कं संशाय पविमिन्द्र तिग्मं वि शत्रून्ताळि वि मर्धो नुदस्व|	whetting thy bold and thy sharp blade o indra crush thou the foe and scatter those who hate us.
इन्द्र कषत्रमभि वाममोजोअजायथा वर्षभचर्षणीनाम|	thou mighty indra sprangest into being as strength for lovely lordship oer the people.
अपानुदो जनममित्रयन्तमुरुं देवेभ्योक्र्णोरु लोकम|	thou drovest off the folk who were unfriendly and to the gods thou gavest room and freedom.
दिवस परि परथमं जज्ञे अग्निरस्मद दवितीयं परिजातवेदाः|	first agni sprang to life from out of heaven the second time from us came jātavedas.
तर्तीयमप्सु नर्मणा अजस्रमिन्धान एनंजरते सवाधीः|	thirdly the manlysouled was in the waters the pious lauds and kindles him the eternal.
विद्मा ते अग्ने तरेधा तरयाणि विद्मा ते धाम विभ्र्तापुरुत्रा|	agni we know thy three powers in three stations we know thy forms in many a place divided.
विद्मा ते नाम परमं गुहा यद विद्मा तमुत्सं यत आजगन्थ|	we know what name supreme thou hast in secret we know the source from which thou hast proceeded.
समुद्रे तवा नर्मणा अप्स्वन्तर्न्र्चक्षा ईधे दिवो अग्नूधन|	the manlysouled lit thee in sea and waters mans viewer lit thee in the breast of heaven.
तर्तीये तवा रजसि तस्थिवांसमपामुपस्थेमहिषा अवर्धन|	there as thou stoodest in the third high region the steers increased thee in the waters bosom.
अक्रन्ददग्नि सतनयन्निव दयौः कषामा रेरिहद वीरुधःसमञ्जन|	agni roared out like dyaus what time he thunders he licked the ground about the plants he flickered.
सद्यो जज्ञानो वि हीमिद्धो अख्यदा रोदसीभानुना भात्यन्तः|	at once when born he looked around enkindled and lightened heaven and earth within with splendour.
शरीणामुदारो धरुणो रयीणां मनीषाणाम्प्रार्पणः सोमगोपाः|	the spring of glories and support of riches rouser of thoughts and guardian of the soma.
वसुः सूनुः सहसो अप्सु राजावि भात्यग्र उषसामिधानः|	good son of strength a king amid the waters in forefront of the dawns he shines enkindled.
विश्वस्य केतुर्भुवनस्य गर्भ आ रोदसी अप्र्णाज्जायमानः|	germ of the world ensign of all creation be sprang to life and filled the earth and heavens.
वीळुं चिदद्रिमभिनत परायञ जना यदग्निमयजन्त पञ्च|	even the firm rock he cleft when passing over when the five tribes brought sacrifice to agni.
उशिक पावको अरतिः सुमेधा मर्तेष्वग्निरम्र्तो नि धायि|	so among mortals was immortal agni stablished as holy wise and willing envoy.
इयर्ति धूममरुषं भरिभ्रदुच्छुक्रेण शोचिषाद्या इनक्षन|	he waves the red smoke that he lifts above him striving to reach the heavens with radiant lustre.
दर्शानो रुक्म उर्विया वयद्यौद दुर्मर्षमायुः शरियेरुचानः|	like gold to look on far he shone refulgent beaming imperishable life for glory.
अग्निरम्र्तो अभवद वयोभिर्यदेनं दयौर्जनयत सुरेताः|	agni by vital powers became immortal when his prolific father dyaus begat him.
यस्ते अद्य कर्णवद भद्रशोचेअपूपं देव घर्तवन्तमग्ने|	whoso this day o god whose flames are lovely prepares a cake o agni mixt with butter.
पर तं नय परतरं वस्यो अछाभि सुम्नं देवभक्तंयविष्ठ|	lead thou and further him to higher fortune to bliss bestowed by gods o thou most youthful.
आ तं भज सौश्रवसेष्वग्न उक्थौक्थ आ भज शस्यमाने|	endow him agni with a share of glory at every song of praise sung forth enrich him.
परियः सूर्ये परियो अग्ना भवात्युज्जातेन भिनददुज्जनित्वैः|	dear let him be to sūrya dear to agni preeminent with son and childrens children.
तवामग्ने यजमाना अनु दयून विश्वा वसु दधिरे वार्याणि|	while agni day by day men pay thee worship they win themselves all treasures worth the wishing.
तवया सह दरविणमिछमाना वरजं गोमन्तमुशिजो विवव्रुः|	allied with thee eager and craving riches they have disclosed the stable filled with cattle.
अस्ताव्यग्निर्नरां सुशेवो वैश्वानर रषिभिःसोमगोपाः|	agni the friend of men the somas keeper vaiśvānara hath been lauded by the Ṛṣis.
अद्वेषे दयावाप्र्थिवी हुवेम देवा धत्त रयिमस्मे सुवीरम|	we will invoke benignant earth and heaven ye deities give us wealth with hero children.
पर केतुना बर्हता यात्यग्निरा रोदसी वर्षभो रोरवीति|	agni advances with his lofty banner the bull is bellowing to the earth and heavens.
दिवश्चिदन्तानुपमानुदानळ अपामुपस्थे महिषोववर्ध|	he hath attained the skys supremest limits the steer hath waxen in the lap of waters.
मुमोद गर्भो वर्षभः ककुद्मानस्रेमा वत्सः शिमीवानरावीत|	the bull the youngling with the hump hath frolicked the strong and neverceasing calf hath bellowed.
स देवतात्युद्यतानि कर्ण्वन सवेषु कषयेषुप्रथमो जिगाति|	bringing our offerings to the gods assembly he moves as chief in his own dwellingplaces.
आ यो मूर्धानं पित्रोररब्ध नयध्वरे दधिरे सूरोर्णः|	him who hath grasped his parents head they stablished at sacrifice a wave of heavenly lustre.
अस्य पत्मन्नरुषीरश्वभुध्ना रतस्य योनौतन्वो जुषन्त|	in his swift flight the red dawns borne by horses refresh their bodies in the home of order.
उषउषो हि वसो अग्रमेषि तवं यमयोरभवो विभावा|	for vasu thou precedest every morning and still hast been the twins illuminator.
रताय सप्त दधिषे पदानि जनयन मित्रं तन्वे सवायै|	for sacrifice seven places thou retainest while for thine own self thou engenderest mitra.
भुवश्चक्षुर्मह रतस्य गोपा भुवो वरुणो यद रतायवेषि|	thou art the eye and guard of mighty order and varuṇa when to sacrifice thou comest.
भुवो अपां नपाज्जातवेदो भुवो दूतो यस्यहव्यं जुजोषः|	thou art the waters child o jātavedas envoy of him whose offering thou acceptest.
भुवो यज्ञस्य रजसश्च नेता यत्रा नियुद्भिः सचसेशिवाभिः|	thou art the leader of the rite and region to which with thine auspicious teams thou teadest.
दिवि मूर्धानं दधिषे सवर्षां जिह्वामग्नेचक्र्षे हव्यवाहम|	thy lightbestowing head to heaven thou liftest making thy tongue the oblationbearer agni.
अस्य तरितः करतुना वव्रे अन्तरिछन धीतिं पितुरेवैःपरस्य|	through his wise insight trita in the cavern seeking as ever the chief sires intention.
सचस्यमानः पित्रोरुपस्थे जामि बरुवाणायुधानि वेति|	carefully tended in his parents bosom calling the weapons kin goes forth to combat.
स पित्र्याण्यायुधनि विद्वनिन्द्रेषित आप्त्यो अभ्ययुध्यत|	wellskilled to use the weapons of his father Āptya urged on by indra fought the battle.
तरिशीर्षाणं सप्तरश्मिं जघन्वान तवाष्ट्रस्य चिन्निः सस्र्जे तरितो गाः|	then trita slew the foe sevenrayed threeheaded and freed the cattle of the son of tvaṣṭar.
भूरीदिन्द्र उदिनक्षन्तमोजोअवाभिनत सत्पतिर्मन्यमानम|	lord of the brave indra cleft him in pieces who sought to gain much strength and deemed him mighty.
तवाष्ट्रस्य चिद विश्वरूपस्य गोनामाचक्रणस्त्रीणि शीर्षा परा वर्क|	he smote his three heads from his body seizing the cattle of the oniniform son of tvaṣṭar.
यस्ते मन्योअविधद वज्र सायक सह ओजः पुष्यति विश्वमानुषक|	he who hath reverenced thee manyu destructive bolt breeds for himself forthwith all conquering energy.
साह्याम दासमार्यं तवया युजा सहस्क्र्तेनसहसा सहस्वता|	Ārya and dāsa will we conquer with thine aid with thee the conqueror with conquest conquestsped.
मन्युरिन्द्रो मन्युरेवास देवो मन्युर्होता वरुणोजातवेदाः|	manyu was indra yea the god was manyu manyu was hotar varuṇa jātavedas.
मन्युं विश ईळते मानुषीर्याः पाहि नोमन्यो तपसा सजोषाः|	the tribes of human lineage worship manyu accordant with thy fervour manyu guard us.
अभीहि मन्यो तवसस्तवीयान तपसा युजा वि जहि शत्रून|	come hither manyu mightier tham the mighty chase with thy fervour for ally our foemen.
अमित्रहा वर्त्रहा दस्युहा च विश्वा वसून्या भरात्वं नः|	slayer of foes of vṛtra and of dasyu bring thou to us all kinds of wealth and treasure.
तवं हि मन्यो अभिभूत्योजाः सवयम्भूर्भामोभिमातिषाहः|	for thou art manyu of surpassing vigour fierce queller of the foe and selfexistent.
विश्वचर्षणिः सहुरिः सहावानस्मास्वोजः पर्तनासु धेहि|	shared by all men victorious subduer vouchsafe to us superior strengith in battles.
अभागः सन्नप परेतो अस्मि तव करत्वा तविषस्यप्रचेतः|	i have departed still without a portion wise god according to thy will the mighty.
तं तवा मन्यो अक्रतुर्जिहीळाहं सवा तनूर्बलदेयाय मेहि|	i feeble man was wroth thee o manyu i am myself come thou to give me vigour.
अयं ते अस्म्युप मेह्यर्वां परतीचीनः सहुरे विश्वधायः|	come hither i am all thine own advancing turn thou to me victorious allsupporter.
मन्यो वज्रिन्नभि मामा वव्र्त्स्व हनाव दस्यून्रुतबोध्यापेः|	come to me manyu wielder of the thunder bethink thee of thy friend and slay the dasyus.
अभि परेहि दक्षिणतो भवा मेअधा वर्त्राणि जङघनावभूरि|	approach and on my right hand hold thy station so shall we slay a multitude of foemen.
जुहोमि ते धरुणं मध्वो अग्रमुभा उपांशुप्रथमा पिबाव|	the best of meath i offer to support thee may we be first to drink thereof in quiet.
समिद्धश्चित समिध्यसे देवेभ्यो हव्यवाहन|	thou bearer of oblations though kindled art kindled for the gods.
आदित्यैरुद्रैर्वसुभिर्न आ गहि मर्ळीकाय न आ गहि|	with the Ādityas rudras vasus come to us to show us favour come to us.
इमं यज्ञमिदं वचो जुजुषाण उपागहि|	come hither and accept with joy this sacrifice and hymn of ours.
मर्तासस्त्वासमिधान हवामहे मर्ळीकाय हवामहे|	o kindled god we mortals are invoking thee calling on thee to show us grace.
तवामु जातवेदसं विश्ववारं गर्णे धिया|	i laud thee jātavedas thee lord of all blessings with my song.
अग्ने देवाना वह नः परियव्रतान मर्ळीकाय परियव्रतान|	agni bring hitherward the gods whose laws we love whose laws we love to show us grace.
अग्निर्देवो देवानामभवत पुरोहितोअग्निं मनुष्या रषयःसमीधिरे|	agni the god was made the great highpriest of gods Ṛṣis have kindled agni men of mortal mould.
अग्निं महो धनसातावहं हुवे मर्ळीकन्धनसातये|	agni i invocate for winning ample wealth kindly disposed for winning wealth.
अग्निरत्रिं भरद्वाजं गविष्ठिरं परावन नः कण्वन्त्रसदस्युमाहवे|	atri and bharadvāja and gavisthira kaṇva and trasadasyu in our fight he helped.
अग्निं वसिष्ठो हवते पुरोहितोम्र्ळीकाय पुरोहितः|	on agni calls vasiṣṭha even the household priest the household priest to win his grace.
पर तार्यायुः परतरं नवीय सथातारेव करतुमतारथस्य|	his life hath been renewed and carried forward as two men carborne by the skilful driver.
अध चयवान उत तवीत्यर्थं परातरं सग़्म|	one falls then seeks the goal with quickened vigour let nirrti depart to distant places.
सामन नु राये निधिमन नवन्नं करामहे सु पुरुधश्रवांसि|	here is the psalm for wealth and food in plenty let us do many deeds to bring us glory.
ता नो विश्वानि जरिता ममत्तु परातरं सुनिरतिर्जिहीताम|	all these our doings shall delight the singer let nirrti depart to distant places.
अभी षवर्यः पौंस्यैर्भवेम दयौर्न भूमिं गिरयोनाज्रन|	may we oercome our foes with acts of valour as heaven is over earth hills over lowlands.
ता नो विश्वानि जरिता चिकेत परातरं सुनिरतिर्जिहीताम|	all these our deeds the singer hath considered let nirrti depart to distant places.
मो षु णः सोम मर्त्यवे परा दाः पश्येम नु सूर्यमुच्चरन्तम|	give us not up as prey to death o soma still let us look upon the sun arising.
दयुभिर्हितो जरिमा सू नो अस्तु परातरं सुनिरतिर्जिहीताम|	let our old age with passing days be kindly let nirrti depart to distant places.
असुनीते मनो अस्मासु धारय जीवातवे सु पर तिरा नायुः|	o asuniti keep the soul within us and make the days we have to live yet longer.
रारन्धि नः सूर्यस्य सन्द्र्शि घर्तेन तवन्तन्वं वर्धयस्व|	grant that we still may look upon the sunlight strengthen thy body with the oil we bring thee.
असुनीते पुनरस्मासु चक्षुः पुनः पराणमिह नो धेहिभोगम|	give us our sight again o asuniti give us again our breath and our enjoyment.
जयोक पश्येम सूर्यमुच्चरन्तमनुमते मर्ळया नह्स्वस्ति|	long may we look upon the sun uprising o anumati favour thou and bless us.
पुनर्नो असुं पर्थिवी ददातु पुनर्द्यौर्देवी पुनरन्तरिक्षम|	may earth restore to us our vital spirit may heaven the goddess and midair restore it.
पुनर्नः सोमस्तन्वं ददातु पुनः पूषापथ्यां या सवस्तिः|	may soma give us once again our body and pūṣan show the path of peace and comfort.
शं रोदसी सुबन्धवे यह्वी रतस्य मातरा|	may both worlds bless subandhu young mothers of everlasting law.
भरतामप यद रपो दयौः पर्थिवि कषमा रपो मो षु ते किंचनाममत|	may heaven and earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee.
अव दवके अव तरिका दिवश्चरन्ति भेषजा|	healthgiving medicines descend sent down from heaven in twos and threes.
कषमाचरिष्ण्वेककं भरतामप यद रपो दयौः पर्थिवि कषमारपो मो षु ते किं चनाममत|	or wandering singly on the earth may heaven and earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee.
समिन्द्रेरय गामनड्वाहं य आवहदुशीनराण्यानः|	drive forward thou the wagonox o indra which brought usinaranis wagon hither.
भरतामप यद रपो दयौः पर्थिवि कषमा रपो मोषु ते किं चनाममत|	may heaven and earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee.
पर सूनव रभूणां बर्हन नवन्त वर्जना|	with hymns of praise their sons have told aloud the Ṛbhus mighty deeds.
कषामा येविश्वधायसोअश्नन धेनुं न मातरम|	who allsupporting have enjoyed the earth as twere a mother cow.
पर देवं देव्या धिया भरता जातवेदसम|	bring forth the god with song divine being jātavedas hitherward.
हव्या नोवक्षदानुषक|	to bear our gifts at once to heaven.
अयमु षय पर देवयुर्होता यज्ञाय नीयते|	he here a goddevoted priest led forward comes to sacrifice.
रथो नयोरभीव्र्तो घर्णीवाञ्चेतति तमना|	like a car covered for the road he glowing knows himself the way.
अयमग्निरुरुष्यत्यम्र्तादिव जन्मनः|	this agni rescues from distress as twere from the immortal race.
सहसश्चिद्सहीयान देवो जीवातवे कर्तः|	a god yet mightier than strength a god who hath been made for life.
तवं तयमिटतो रथमिन्द्र परावः सुतावतः|	for iṭas sake who pressed the juice thou indra didst protect his car.
अश्र्णोः सोमिनो हवम|	and hear the somagivers call.
तवं मखस्य दोधतः शिरोअव तवचो भरः|	thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swiftmoving combatant.
अगछःसोमिनो गर्हम|	and sought the somapourers home.
तवं तयमिन्द्र मर्त्यमास्त्रबुध्नाय वेन्यम|	venya that mortal man hast thou for Āstrabudhna the devout.
मुहुःश्रथ्ना मनस्यवे|	o indra many a time set free.
तवं तयमिन्द्र सूर्यं पश्चा सन्तं पुरस कर्धि|	bring indra to the east again that sun who now is in the west.
देवानां चित तिरो वशम|	even against the will of gods.
अहं दां गर्णते पूर्व्यं वस्वहं बरह्म कर्णवं मह्यंवर्धनम|	i have enriched the singer with surpassing wealth i have allowed the holy hymn to strengthen me.
अहं भुवं यजमानस्य चोदितायज्वनः साक्षिविश्वस्मिन भरे|	i furtherer of him who offers sacrifice have conquered in each fight the men who worship not.
मां धुरिन्द्रं नाम देवता दिवश्च गमश्चापां चजन्तवः|	the people of the heavens the waters and the earth have stablished me among the gods with indras name.
अहं हरी वर्षणा विव्रता रघू अहंवज्रं शवसे धर्ष्ण्वा ददे|	i took unto myself the two swift vigorous bays that speed on divers paths and the fierce bolt for strength.
अहमत्कं कवये शिश्नथं हथैरहं कुत्समावमाभिरूतिभिः|	with deadly blows i smote atka for kavis sake i guarded kutsa well with these saving helps.
अहं शुष्णस्य शनथिता वधर्यमंन यो रर आर्यं नाम दस्यवे|	as Śuṣṇas slayer i brandished the dart of death i gave not up the Āryan name to dasyu foes.
अहं पितेव वेतसून्रभिष्टये तुग्रं कुत्साय समदिभंच रन्धयम|	smadibha tugra and the vetasus i gave as prey to kutsa fatherlike to succour him.
अहं भुवं यजमानस्य राजनि पर यद भरेतुजये न परियाध्र्षे|	i was a worthy king to rule the worshipper when i gave tuji dear inviolable gifts.
अहं रन्धयं मर्गयं शरुतर्वणे यन माजिहीत वयुनाचनानुषक|	i gave up mṛgaya to srutarvan as his prey because he ever followed me and kept my laws.
अहं वेशं नम्रमायवेअकरमहंसव्याय पड्ग्र्भिमरन्धयम|	for Āyus sake i caused veta to bend and bow and into savyas hand delivered padgrbhi.
अहं स यो नववास्त्वं बर्हद्रथं सं वर्त्रेव दासंव्र्त्रहारुजम|	i crushed navavāstva of the lofty car the dāsa as the vṛtraslayer kills the fiends.
यद वर्धयन्तं परथयन्तमानुषग दूरेपारे रजसो रोचनाकरम|	when straightway on the regions farthest edge i brought the god who makes the lights to broaden and increase.
अहं सूर्यस्य परि याम्याशुभिः परैतशेभिर्वहमानोजसा|	i travel round about borne onward in my might by the fleetfooted dappled horses of the sun.
यन मा सावो मनुष आह निर्णिज रधक कर्षेदासं कर्त्व्यं हथैः|	when mans libation calls me to the robe of state i soon repel the powerful dasyu with my blows.
अहं सप्तहा नहुषो नहुष्टरः पराश्राव यं शवसातुर्वशं यदुम|	stronger am i than nabus i who slew the seven i glorified with might yadu and turvaga.
अहं नयन्यं सहसा सहस करं नवव्राधतो नवतिं च वक्षयम|	i brought another low with strength i bent his strength i let the mighty nineandninety wax in power.
अहं सप्त सरवतो धारयं वर्षा दरवित्न्वः पर्थिव्यांसीरा अधि|	bull over all the streams that flow along the earth i took the seven rivers as mine own domain.
अहमर्णांसि वि तिरामि सुक्रतुर्युधा विदम्मनवे गातुमिष्टये|	i gifted with great wisdom spread the floods abroad by war i found for man the way to high success.
अहं तदासु धारयं यदासु न देवश्चनत्वष्टाधारयद रुशत|	i set within these cows the white milk which no god not even tvaṣṭars self had there deposited.
सपार्हं गवामूधस्सुवक्षणास्वा मधोर्मधु शवात्र्यं सोममाशिरम|	muchlongedfor in the breasts the udders of the kine the savoury sweets of meath the milk and soma juice.
एवा देवानिन्द्रो विव्ये नॄन पर चयौत्नेन मघवासत्यराधाः|	even thus hath indra maghavan truly bounteous sped gods and men with mighty operation.
विश्वेत ता ते हरिवः शचीवोअभितुरासः सवयशो गर्णन्ति|	the pious glorify all these thine exploits lord of bay coursers strong and selfresplendent.
कं नश्चित्रमिषण्यसि चिकित्वान पर्थुग्मानं वाश्रंवाव्र्धध्यै|	what splendid one loudvoiced farstriding dost thou well knowing urge us to exalt with praises.
कत तस्य दातु शवसो वयुष्टौ तक्षद्वज्रं वर्त्रतुरमपिन्वत|	what give we him when his might dawned he fashioned the vṛtraslaying bolt and sent us waters.
स हि दयुता विद्युता वेति साम पर्थुं योनिमसुरत्वाससाद|	he goes to end his work with lightning flashes wide is the seat his asura glory gives him.
स सनीळेभिः परसहानो अस्य भरातुर्न रतेसप्तथस्य मायाः|	with his companions not without his brother he quells saptathas magic devices.
स वाजं यातापदुष्पदा यन सवर्षाता परि षदत्सनिष्यन|	on most auspicious path he goes to battle he toiled to win heavens light full fain to gain it.
अनर्वा यच्छतदुरस्य वेदो घनञ्छिश्नदेवानभि वर्पसा भूत|	he seized the hundredgated castles treasure by craft unchecked and slew the lustful demons.
स यह्व्योअवनीर्गोष्वर्वा जुहोति परधन्यासु सस्रिः|	fighting for kine the prize of war and i roaming among the berd be brings the young streams hither.
अपादो यत्र युज्यासोअरथा दरोण्यश्वास ईरते घर्तंवाः|	where footless joined without a car to bear them with jars for steeds they pour their flood like butter.
स रुद्रेभिरशस्तवार रभ्वा हित्वी गयमारेवद्यागात|	bold unsolicited for wealth with rudras he came the blameless having left his dwelling.
वम्रस्य मन्ये मिथुना विवव्री अन्नमभीत्यारोदयन्मुषायन|	came seized the food of vamra and his consort and left the couple weeping and unsheltered.
स इद दासं तुवीरवं पतिर्दन षळक्षन्त्रिशीर्षाणं दमन्यत|	lord of the dwelling he subdued the demon who roared aloud sixeyed and tripleheaded.
अस्य तरितो नवोजसा वर्धानो विपावराहमयोग्रया हन|	tṛta made stronger by the might he lent him struck down the boar with shaft whose point was iron.
स दरुह्वणे मनुष ऊर्ध्वसान आ साविषदर्शसानायशरुम|	he raised himself on high and shot his arrow against the guileful and oppressive foeman.
स नर्तमो नहुषोअस्मत सुजातः पुरोअभिनदर्हन्दस्युहत्ये|	strong glorious manliest for us he shattered the forts of nabus when he slew the dasyus.
सो अभ्रियो न यवस उदन्यन कषयाय गातुं विदन नो अस्मे|	he like a cloud that rains upon the pasture hath found for us the way to dwell in safety.
उप यत सीददिन्दुं शरीरैः शयेनोअयोपाष्टिर्हन्तिदस्यून|	when the hawk comes in body to the soma armed with his iron claws he slays the dasyus.
स वराधतः शवसानेभिरस्य कुत्साय शुष्णं कर्पणेपरादात|	he with his potent friends gave up the mighty gave gusnia up to kutsa for affliction.
अयं कविमनयच्छस्यमानमत्कं वो अस्यसनितोत नर्णाम|	he led the lauded kavi he delivered atka as prey to him and to his heroes.
अयं दशस्यन नर्येभिरस्य दस्मो देवेभिर्वरुणो नमायी|	he with his gods who love mankind the wondrous giving like varuṇa who works with magic.
अयं कनीन रतुपा अवेद्यमिमीताररुं यश्चतुष्पात|	was known yet young as guardian of the seasons and he quelled araru fourfooted dernon.
अस्य सतोमेभिरौशिज रजिश्वा वरजं दरयद वर्षभेणपिप्रोः|	through lauds of him hath auśija Ṛjiśvan burst with the mightys aid the stall of pipru.
सुत्वा यद यजतो दीदयद गीः पुर इयानो अभिवर्पसा भूत|	when the saint pressed the juice and shone as singer he seized the forts and with his craft subdued them.
एवा महो असुर वक्षथाय वम्रकः पड्भिरुप सर्पदिन्द्रम|	so swiftly asura for exaltation hath the great vamraka come nigh to indra.
स इयानः करति सवस्तिमस्मा इषमूर्जंसुक्षितिं विश्वमाभाः|	he will when supplicated bring him blessing he hath brought all food strength a happy dwelling.
अस्मिन न इन्द्र पर्त्सुतौ यशस्वति शिमीवति करन्दसि परावसातये|	o indra in this battle great and glorious in this loud din of war help us to victory.
यत्र गोषाता धर्षितेषु खादिषु विष्वक्पतन्ति दिद्यवो नर्षाह्ये|	where in the strife for kine among bold ringdecked men arrows fly all around and heroes are subdued.
स नः कषुमन्तं सदने वयूर्णुहि गोर्णसं रयिमिन्द्रश्रवाय्यम|	at home disclose to us opulence rich in food streaming with milk o indra meet to be renowned.
सयाम ते जयतः शक्र मेदिनो यथा वयमुश्मसि तद वसो कर्धि|	Śakra may we be thine the friendly conquerors even as we desire o vasu so do thou.
यो नो दास आर्यो वा पुरुष्टुतादेव इन्द्र युधये चिकेतति|	the godless man muchlauded indra whether he be dāsa or be Ārya who would war with us.
अस्माभिष टे सुषहाः सन्तु शत्रवस्त्वया वयं तान्वनुयाम संगमे|	easy to conquer he for thee with us these foes with thee may we subdue them in the clash of fight.
यो दभ्रेभिर्हव्यो यश्च भूरिभिर्यो अभीके वरिवोविन्न्र्षाह्ये|	him who must be invoked by many and by few who standeth nigh with comfort in the war of men.
तं विखादे सस्निमद्य शरुतं नरमर्वाञ्चमिन्द्रमवसे करामहे|	indra famed hero winner in the deadly strife let us bring hitherward today to favour us.
सवव्र्जं हि तवामहमिन्द्र शुश्रवानानुदं वर्षभरध्रचोदनम|	for indra i have heard thee called self capturer one steer who never yields who urges even the churl.
पर मुञ्चस्व परि कुत्सादिहा गहि किमुत्वावान मुष्कयोर्बद्ध आसते|	release thyself from kutsa and come hither how shall one like thee sit still bound that he may not move.
दूरे तन नाम गुह्यं पराचैर्यत तवा भीते अह्वयेतांवयोधै|	far is that secret name by which in terror the worlds invoked thee and thou gavest vigour.
उदस्तभ्नाः पर्थिवीं दयामभीके भरातुःपुत्रान मघवन तित्विषाणः|	the earth and heaven thou settest near each other and maghavan madest bright thy brothers children.
महत तन नाम गुह्यं पुरुस्प्र्ग येन भूतं जनयो येनभव्यम|	great is that secret name and farextending whereby thou madest all that is and shall be.
परत्नं जातं जयोतिर्यदस्य परियं परियाः समविशन्त पञ्च|	the five tribes whom he loveth well have entered the light he loveth that was made aforetime.
आ रोदसी अप्र्णादोत मध्यं पञ्च देवान रतुशः सप्त सप्त|	he filled the heaven and earth and all between them gods five times sevenfold in their proper seasons.
चतुस्त्रिंशता पुरुधा वि चष्टे सरूपेण जयोतिषाविव्रतेन|	with fourandthirty lights he looks around him lights of one colour though their ways are divers.
यदुष औछः परथमा विभानामजनयो येन पुष्टस्यपुष्टम|	as first among the lights o dawn thou shonest whereby thou broughtest forth the stay of increase.
यत ते जामित्वमवरं परस्या महन महत्यासुरत्वमेकम|	great art thou matchless is thine asura nature who high above art kin to those beneath thee.
विधुं दद्राणं समने बहूनां युवानं सन्तं पलितोजगार|	the old hath waked the young moon from his slumber who runs his circling course with many round him.
देवस्य पश्य काव्यं महित्वाद्या ममार स हयःसमान|	behold the gods high wisdom in its greatness he who died yesterday today is living.
शाक्मना शाको अरुणः सुपर्ण आ यो महः शूरःसनादनीळः|	strong is the red bird in his strength great hero who from of old hath had no nest to dwell in.
यच्चिकेत सत्यमित तन न मोघं वसुस्पार्हमुत जेतोत दाता|	that which he knows is truth and never idle he wins and gives the wealth desired of many.
ऐभिर्ददे वर्ष्ण्या पौंस्यानि येभिरौक्षद वर्त्रहत्यायवज्री|	through these the thunderer gained strong manly vigour through whom he waxed in power to smite down vṛtra.
ये कर्मणः करियमाणस्य मह्न रतेकर्ममुदजायन्त देवाः|	who through the might of indras operation came forth as gods in course of law and order.
युजा कर्माणि जनयन विश्वौजा अशस्तिथा विश्वमनास्तुराषाट|	allstrong performing works with his companion allmarking rapid victor curseaverter.
पीत्वी सोमस्य दिव आ वर्धानः शूरो निर्युधाधमद दस्यून|	the hero waxing after draughts of soma blew far from heaven the dasyus with his weapon.
अयं वेनश्चोदयत पर्श्निगर्भा जयोतिर्जरायू रजसोविमाने|	see vena born in light hath driven hither on chariot of the air the calves of pṛśni.
इममपां संगमे सूर्यस्य शिशुं न विप्रामतिभी रिहन्ति|	singers with hymns caress him as an infant there where the waters and the sunlight mingle.
समुद्रादूर्मिमुदियर्ति वेनो नभोजाः पर्ष्ठंहर्यतस्य दर्शि|	vena draws up his wave from out the ocean mistborn the fair ones back is made apparent.
रतस्य सानावधि विष्टपि भराट्समानं योनिमभ्यनूषत वराः|	brightly he shone aloft on orders summit the hosts sang glory to their common birthplace.
समानं पूर्वीरभि वावशानास्तिष्ठन वत्सस्यमातरः सनीळाः|	full many lowing to their jointpossession dwelling together stood the darlings mothers.
रतस्य सानावधि चक्रमाणारिहन्ति मध्वो अम्र्तस्य वाणीः|	ascending to the lofty height of order the bands of singers sip the sweets of amṛta.
जानन्तो रूपमक्र्पन्त विप्रा मर्गस्य घोषं महिषस्य हिग्मन|	knowing his form the sages yearned to meet him they have come nigh to hear the wild bulls bellow.
रतेन यन्तो अधि सिन्धुमस्थुर्विदद गन्धर्वोम्र्तानि नाम|	performing sacrifice they reached the river for the gandharva found the immortal waters.
अप्सरा जारमुपसिष्मियाणा योषा बिभर्ति परमे वयोमन|	the apsaras the lady sweetly smiling supports her lover in sublimest heaven.
चरत परियस्य योनिषु परियः सन सीदत पक्षे हिरण्ययेस वेनः|	in his friends dwelling as a friend he wanders he vena rests him on his golden pinion.
नाके सुपर्णमुप यत पतन्तं हर्दा वेनन्तो अभ्यचक्षतत्वा|	they gaze on thee with longing in their spirit as on a strongwinged bird that mounteth skyward.
हिरण्यपक्षं वरुणस्य दूतं यमस्य योनौशकुनं भुरण्युम|	on thee with wings of gold varuṇas envoy the bird that hasteneth to the home of yama.
ऊर्ध्वो गन्धर्वो अधि नाके अस्थात परत्यं चित्रा बिभ्रदस्यायुधानि|	erect to heaven hath the gandharva mounted pointing at us his manycoloured weapons.
वसानो अत्कं सुरभिं दर्शे कं सवर्णनाम जनत परियाणि|	clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on for he as light produceth forms that please us.
दरप्सः समुद्रमभि यज्जिगाति पश्यन गर्ध्रस्य चक्षसाविधर्मन|	when as a spark he cometh near the ocean still looking with a vultures eye to heaven.
भानुः शुक्रेण शोचिषा चकानस्त्र्तीये चक्रेरजसि परियाणि|	his lustre joying in its own bright splendour maketh dear glories in the lowest region.
अस्तेव सु परतरं लायमस्यन भूषन्निव पर भरास्तोममस्मै|	even as an archer shoots afar his arrow offer the laud to him with meet adornment.
वाचा विप्रास्तरत वाचमर्यो नि रामयजरितः सोम इन्द्रम|	quell with your voice the wickeds voice o sages singer make indra rest beside the soma.
दोहेन गामुप शिक्षा सखायं पर बोधय जरितर्जारमिन्द्रम|	draw thy friend to thee like a cow at milking o singer wake up indra as a lover.
कोशं न पूर्णं वसुना नय्र्ष्टमा चयावयमघदेयाय शूरम|	make thou the hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel filled brimful with treasure.
किमङग तवा मघवन भोजमाहुः शिशीहि मा शिशयन्त्वा शर्णोमि|	why maghavan do they call thee bounteous giver quicken me thou i hear art he who quickens.
अप्नस्वती मम धीरस्तु शक्र वसुविदम्भगमिन्द्रा भरा नः|	Śakra let my intelligence be active and bring us luck that finds great wealth o indra.
तवां जना ममसत्येष्विन्द्र सन्तस्थाना वि हवयन्तेसमीके|	standing in battle for their rights together the people indra in the fray invoke thee.
अत्रा युजं कर्णुते यो हविष्मान नासुन्वतासख्यं वष्टि शूरः|	him who brings gifts the hero makes his comrade with him who pours no juice he seeks not friendship.
धनं न सयन्द्रं बहुलं यो अस्मै तीव्रान सोमानासुनोतिप्रयस्वान|	whoso with plenteous food for him expresses strong somas as much quicklycoming treasure.
तस्मै शत्रून सुतुकान परातरह्नो निस्वष्ट्रान युवति हन्ति वर्त्रम|	for him he overthrows in early morning his swift wellweaponed foes and slays the tyrant.
यस्मिन वयं दधिमा शंसमिन्द्रे यः शिश्राय मघवाकाममस्मे|	he unto whom we offer praises indra maghavan who hath joined to ours his wishes.
आराच्चित सन भयतामस्य शत्रुर्न्यस्मैद्युम्ना जन्या नमन्ताम|	before him even afar the foe must tremble low before him must bow all human glories.
आराच्छत्रुमप बाधस्व दूरमुग्रो यः शम्बःपुरुहूत तेन|	with thy fierce bolt o god invoked of many drive to a distance from afar the foeman.
अस्मे धेहि यवमद गोमदिन्द्र कर्धी धियंजरित्रे वाजरत्नाम|	o indra give us wealth in corn and cattle and make thy singers prayer gain strength and riches.
पर यमन्तर्व्र्षसवासो अग्मन तीव्राः सोमा बहुलान्तासैन्द्रम|	indra the swallower of strong libations rich in the boons they bring the potent somas.
नाह दामानं मघवा नि यंसन नि सुन्वते वहतिभूरि वामम|	he maghavan will not restrict his bounty he brings much wealth unto the somapresser.
उत परहामतिदीव्या जयाति कर्तं यच्छ्वघ्नी विचिनोतिकाले|	yea by superior play he wins advantage when he a gambler piles his gains in season.
यो देवकामो न धना रुणद्धि समित तं रायास्र्जति सवधावान|	celestialnatured he oerwhelms with riches the devotee who keeps not back his treasure.
गोभिष टरेमामतिं दुरेवां यवेन कषुधं पुरुहूतविश्वाम|	o muchinvoked may we subdue all famine and evil want with store of grain and cattle.
वयं राजभिः परथमा धनान्यस्माकेनव्र्जनेना जयेम|	may we allied as first in rank with princes obtain possessions by our own exertion.
बर्हस्पतिर्नः परि पातु पश्चादुतोत्तरस्मादधरादघायोः|	bṛhaspati protect us from the rearward and from above and from below from sinners.
इद्रः पुरस्तादुत मध्यतो नः सखा सखिभ्योवरिवः कर्णोतु|	may indra from the front and from the centre as friend to friends vouchsafe us room and freedom.
शरत ते दधामि परथमाय मन्यवेअहन यद वर्त्रं नर्यंविवेरपः|	i trust in thy first wrathful deed o indra when thou slewest vṛtra and didst work to profit man.
उभे यत तवा भवतो रोदसी अनु रेजतेशुष्मात पर्थिवी चिदद्रिवः|	what time the two worldhalves fell short of thee in might and the earth trembled at thy force o thunderanned.
तवं मायाभिरनवद्य मायिनं शरवस्यता मनसा वर्त्रमर्दयः|	thou with thy magic powers didst rend the conjurer vṛtra o blameless one with heart that longed for fame.
तवमिन नरो वर्णते गविष्टिषु तवां विश्वासुहव्यास्विष्टिषु|	heroes elect thee when they battle for the prey thee in all sacrifices worthy of renown.
ऐषु चाकन्धि पुरुहूत सूरिषु वर्धासो ये मघवन्नानशुर्मघम|	god muchinvoked take pleasure in these princes here who thine exalters maghavan have come to wealth.
अर्चन्ति तोके तनये परिष्टिषु मेधसाता वाजिनमह्रये धने|	in synods when the rite succeeds they hymn the strong for sons and progeny and riches undisturbed.
स इन नु रायः सुभ्र्तस्य चाकनन मदं यो अस्य रंह्यंचिकेतति|	that man shall find delight in wellprotected wealth whose care provides for him the quicksought joyous draught.
तवाव्र्धो मघवन दाश्वध्वरो मक्षू स वाजम्भरते धना नर्भिः|	bringing oblations strengthened maghavan by thee he swiftly wins the spoil with heroes in the fight.
तवं शर्धाय महिना गर्णान उरु कर्धि मघवञ्छग्धिरायः|	now for our band o maghavan when lauded make ample room with might and grant us riches.
तवं नो मित्रो वरुणो न मायी पित्वो न दस्मदयसे विभक्ता|	magician thou our varuṇa and mitra deal food to us o wondrous as dispenser.
अरायि काणे विकटे गिरिं गछ सदान्वे|	arayi oneeyed limping hag fly everscreeching to the hill.
शिरिम्बिठस्यसत्वभिस्तेभिष टवा चातयामसि|	we frighten thee away with these the heroes of sirimbitha.
चत्तो इतश्चत्तामुतः सर्वा भरूणान्यारुषी|	scared from this place and that is she destroyer of each germ unborn.
अराय्यं बरह्मणस पते तीक्ष्णश्र्ण्गोद्र्षन्निहि|	go sharphorned brāhmaṇaspti and drive arayi far away.
अदो यद दारु पलवते सिन्धोः पारे अपूरुषम|	yon log that floats without a man to guide it on the rivers edge.
तदारभस्व दुर्हणो तेन गछ परस्तरम|	seize it thou thing with hideous jaws and go thou far away thereon.
यद ध पराचीरजगन्तोरो मण्डूरधाणिकीः|	when foul with secret stain and spot ye hastened onward to the breast.
हतािन्द्रस्य शत्रवः सर्वे बुद्बुदयाशवः|	all indras enemies were slain and passed away like froth and foam.
परीमे गामनेषत पर्यग्निमह्र्षत|	these men have led about the cow have duly carried agni round.
देवेष्वक्रतश्रवः क इमाना दधर्षति|	and raised their glory tg the gods who will attack them with success.
तवया मन्यो सरथमारुजन्तो हर्षमाणासो धर्षितामरुत्वः|	borne on with thee o manyu girt by maruts let our brave men impetuous bursting forward.
तिग्मेषव आयुधा संशिशाना अभि पर यन्तुनरो अग्निरूपाः|	march on like flames of fire in form exulting with pointed arrows sharpening their weapons.
अग्निरिव मन्यो तविषितः सहस्व सेनानीर्नः सहुरे हूतेधि|	flashing like fire be thou o conquering manyu invoked o victor as our armys leader.
हत्वाय शत्रून वि भजस्व वेद ओजो मिमानो वि मर्धोनुदस्व|	slay thou our foes distribute their possessions show forth thy vigour scatter those who hate us.
सहस्व मन्यो अभिमातिमस्मे रुजन मर्णन परम्र्णन परेहिशत्रून|	o manyu overcome thou our assailant on breaking slaying crushing down the foemen.
उग्रं ते पाजो नन्वा रुरुध्रे वशी वशंनयस एकज तवम|	they have not hindered thine impetuous vigour mighty sole born thou makest them thy subjects.
एको बहूनामसि मन्यवीळितो विशंविशं युधये संशिशाधि|	alone or many thou art worshipped manyu sharpen the spirit of each clan for battle.
अक्र्त्तरुक तवया युजा वयं दयुमन्तं घोषंविजयाय कर्ण्महे|	with thee to aid o thou of perfect splendour we will uplift the glorious shout for conquest.
विजेषक्र्दिन्द्र इवानवब्रवोअस्माकं मन्यो अधिपा भवेह|	unyielding bringing victory like indra o manyu be thou here our sovran ruler.
परियं ते नाम सहुरे गर्णीमसि विद्मा तमुत्सं यताबभूथ|	to thy dear name o victor we sing praises we know the spring from which thou art come hither.
आभूत्या सहजा वज्र सायक सहो बिभर्ष्यभिभूतौत्तरम|	twinborn with power destructive bolt of thunder the highest conquering might is thine subduer.
करत्वा नो मन्यो सह मेद्येधि महाधनस्य पुरुहूतसंस्र्जि|	be friendly to its in thy spirit manyu o muchinvoked in shock of mighty battle.
संस्र्ष्टं धनमुभयं समाक्र्तमस्मभ्यं दत्तांवरुणश्च मन्युः|	for spoil let varuṇa and manyu give us the wealth of both sides gathered and collected.
भियं दधाना हर्दयेषु शत्रवःपराजितासो अप नि लयन्ताम|	and let our enemies with stricken spirits oerwhelmed with terror slink away defeated.
नमो मित्रस्य वरुणस्य चक्षसे महो देवाय तद रतंसपर्यत|	do homage unto varuṇas and mitras eye offer this solemn worship to the mighty god.
दूरेद्र्शे देवजाताय केतवे दिवस पुत्रायसूर्याय शंसत|	who seeth far away the ensign born of gods sing praises unto sūrya to the son of dyaus.
सा मा सत्योक्तिः परि पातु विश्वतो दयावा च यत्रततनन्नहानि च|	may this my truthful speech guard me on every side wherever heaven and earth and days are spread abroad.
विश्वमन्यन नि विशते यदेजतिविश्वाहापो विश्वाहोदेति सूर्यः|	all else that is in motion finds a place of rest the waters ever flow and ever mounts the sun.
न ते अदेवः परदिवो नि वासते यदेतशेभिः पतरैरथर्यसि|	no godless man from time remotest draws thee down when thou art driving forth with winged dappled steeds.
पराचीनमन्यदनु वर्तते रज उदन्येनज्योतिषा यासि सूर्य|	one lustre waits upon thee moving to the cast and sūrya thou arisest with a different light.
येन सूर्य जयोतिषा बाधसे तमो जगच्च विश्वमुदियर्षिभानुना|	o sūrya with the light whereby thou scatterest gloom and with thy ray impellest every moving thing.
तेनास्मद विश्वामनिरामनाहुतिमपामीवामप दुष्वप्न्यं सुव|	keep far from us all feeble worthless sacrifice and drive away disease and every evil dream.
विश्वस्य हि परेषितो रक्षसि वरतमहेळयन्नुच्चरसिस्वधा अनु|	sent forth thou guardest well the universes law and in thy wonted way arisest free from wrath.
यदद्य तवा सूर्योपब्रवामहै तं नो देवानु मंसीरत करतुम|	when sūrya we address our prayers to thee today may the gods favour this our purpose and desire.
तं नो दयावाप्र्थिवी तन न आप इन्द्रः शर्ण्वन्तु मरुतोहवं वचः|	this invocation these our words may heaven and earth and indra and the waters and the maruts hear.
मा शूने भूम सूर्यस्य सन्द्र्शिभद्रं जीवन्तो जरणामशीमहि|	neer may we suffer want in presence of the sun and living happy lives may we attain old age.
विश्वाहा तवा सुमनसः सुचक्षसः परजावन्तो अनमीवानागसः|	cheerful in spirit evermore and keen of sight with store of children free from sickness and from sin.
उद्यन्तं तवा मित्रमहो दिवेदिवे जयोग जीवाःप्रति पश्येम सूर्य|	longliving may we look o sūrya upon thee uprising day by day thou great as mitra is.
महि जयोतिर्बिभ्रतं तवा विचक्षण भास्वन्तं चक्षुषे चक्षुषे मयः|	sūrya may we live long and look upon thee still thee o farseeing one bringing the glorious light.
आरोहन्तं बर्हतः पाजसस परि वयंजीवाः परति पश्येम सूर्य|	the radiant god the spring of joy to every eye as thou art mounting up oer the high shining flood.
यस्य ते विश्वा भुवनानि केतुना पर चेरते नि च विशन्तेक्तुभिः|	thou by whose lustre all the world of life comes forth and by thy beams again returns unto its rest.
अनागास्त्वेन हरिकेश सूर्याह्नाह्ना नोवस्यसावस्यसोदिहि|	o sūrya with the golden hair ascend for us day after day still bringing purer innocence.
शं नो भव चक्षसा शं नो अह्ना शं भानुना शंहिमा शं घर्णेन|	bless us with shine bless us with perfect daylight bless us with cold with fervent heat and lustre.
यथा शमध्वञ्छमसद दुरोणेतत सूर्य दरविणं धेहि चित्रम|	bestow on us o sūrya varied riches to bless us in our home and when we travel.
अस्माकं देवा उभयाय जन्मने शर्म यछत दविपदेचतुष्पदे|	gods to our living creatures of both kinds vouchsafe protection both to bipeds and to quadrupeds.
अदत पिबदूर्जयमानमाशितं तदस्मेशं योररपो दधातन|	that they may drink and eat invigorating food so grant us health and strength and perfect innocence.
यद वो देवाश्चक्र्म जिह्वया गुरु मनसो वा परयुतीदेवहेळनम|	if by some grievous sin we have provoked the gods o deities with the tongue or thoughtlessness of heart.
अरावा यो नो अभि दुछुनायते तस्मिन तदेनोवसवो नि धेतन|	that guilt o vasus lay upon the evil one on him who ever leads us into deep distress.
पर होता जातो महान नभोविन नर्षद्वा सीददपामुपस्थे|	stablished for thee to lend thee vital forces giver of wealth guard of his servants body.
दधिर्यो धायि स ते वयांसि यन्ता वसूनि विधतेतनूपाः|	the great priest born who knows the clouds abider with men is seated in the lap of waters.
इमं विधन्तो अपां सधस्थे पशुं न नष्टं पदैरनु गमन|	worshipping seeking him with adoration like some lost creature followed by its footprints.
गुहा चतन्तमुशिजो नमोभिरिछन्तो धीराभ्र्गवोअविन्दन|	wise bhṛgus yearning in their hearts pursued him and found him lurking where the floods are gathered.
इमं तरितो भूर्यविन्ददिछन वैभूवसो मूर्धन्यघ्न्यायाः|	on the cows forehead with laborious searching trita the offspring of vibhiavas found him.
स शेव्र्धो जात आ हर्म्येषु नाभिर्युवाभवति रोचनस्य|	born in our houses youthful joybestower he now becomes the central point of brightness.
मन्द्रं होतारमुशिजो नमोभिः पराञ्चं यज्ञं नेतारमध्वराणाम|	yearning with homage they have set and made him blithe priest among mankind oblationbearer.
विशामक्र्ण्वन्नरतिं पावकं हव्यवाहन्दधतो मानुषेषु|	leader of rites and purifier envoy of men as sacrifice that still advances.
पर भूर्जयन्तं महां विपोधां मूरा अमूरं पुरान्दर्माणम|	the foolish brought the neerbewildered forward great victor songinspirer fortdestroyer.
नयन्तो गर्भं वनां धियं धुर्हिरिश्मश्रुं नार्वाणं धनर्चम|	leading the youth goldbearded like a courser gleaming with wealth they turned their hymn to profit.
नि पस्त्यासु तरित सतभूयन परिवीतो योनौ सीददन्तः|	holding his station firmly in the houses trita sat down within his home surrounded.
अतः संग्र्भ्या विशां दमूना विधर्मणायन्त्रैरीयतेनॄन|	thence as law bids departs the tribes companion having collected men with no compulsion.
अस्याजरासो दमामरित्रा अर्चद्धूमासो अग्नयः पावकाः|	his are the fires eternal purifying that make the houses move whose smoke is shining.
शवितीचयः शवात्रासो भुरण्यवो वनर्षदो वायवो नसोमाः|	white waxing in their strength for ever stirring and sitting in the wood like winds are somas.
पर जिह्वया भरते वेपो अग्निः पर वयुनानि चेतसाप्र्थिव्याः|	the tongue of agni bears away the praisesong and through his care for earth her operations.
तमायवः शुचयन्तं पावकं मन्द्रंहोतारं दधिरे यजिष्ठम|	him bright and radiant living men have stablished as their blithe priest the chief of sacrificers.
दयावा यमग्निं पर्थिवी जनिष्टामापस्त्वष्टा भर्गवोयं सहोभिः|	that agni him whom heaven and earth engendered the waters tvaṣṭar and with might the bhṛgus.
ईळेन्यं परथमं मातरिश्वा देवास्ततक्षुर्मनवे यजत्रम|	him mātariśvan and the gods have fashioned holy for man and first to be entreated.
यं तवा देवा दधिरे हव्यवाहं पुरुस्प्र्हो मानुषासोयजत्रम|	agni whom gods have made oblationbearer and muchdesiring men regard as holy.
स यामन्नग्ने सतुवते वयो धाः पर देवयन्यशसः सं हि पूर्वीः|	give life to him who lauds thee when he worships and then shall glorious men in troops adore thee.
सूर्यरश्मिर्हरिकेशः पुरस्तात सविता जयोतिरुदयानजस्रम|	savitar goldenhaired hath lifted eastward bright with the sunbeams his eternal lustre.
तस्य पूषा परसवे याति विद्वान सम्पश्यन्विश्वा भुवनानि गोपाः|	he in whose energy wise pūṣan marches surveying all existence like a herdsman.
नर्चक्षा एष दिवो मध्य आस्त आपप्रिवान रोदसीन्तरिक्षम|	beholding men he sits amid the heaven filling the two worldhalves and airs wide region.
स विश्वाचीरभि चष्टे घर्ताचीरन्तरापूर्वमपरं च केतुम|	he looks upon the rich farspreading pastures between the eastern and the western limit.
रायो बुध्नः संगमनो वसूनां विश्वा रूपाभि चष्टेशचीभिः|	he root of wealth the gathererup of treasures looks with his might on every form and figure.
देव इव सविता सत्यधर्मेन्द्रो न तस्थौसमरे धनानाम|	savitar like a godẉhose law is constant stands in the battle for the spoil like indra.
विश्वावसुं सोम गन्धर्वमापो दद्र्शुषीस्तद रतेना वयायन|	waters from sacrifice came to the gandharva visvavasu o soma when they saw him.
तदन्ववैदिन्द्रो रारहाण आसां परि सुर्यस्यपरिधिन्रपश्यत|	indra approaching quickly marked their going and looked around upon the suns enclosures.
विश्वावसुरभि तन नो गर्णातु दिव्यो गन्धर्वो रजसोविमानः|	this song visvavasu shall sing us meter of airs midrealm celestial gandharva.
यद वा घा सत्यमुत यन न विद्म धियोहिन्वानो धिय इन नो अव्याः|	that we may know aright both truth and falsehood may he inspire our thoughts and help our praises.
सस्निमविन्दच्चरणे नदीनामपाव्र्णोद दुरो अश्मव्रजानाम|	in the floods track he found the bootyseeker the rocky cowpens doors he threw wide open.
परासां गन्धर्वो अम्र्तानि वोचदिन्द्रो दक्षं परि जानादहीनाम|	these the gandharva told him rowed with amṛta indra knew well the puissancc of the dragons.
पर वो गरावाणः सविता देवः सुवतु धर्मणा|	may savitar the god o stones stir you according to the law.
धूर्षुयुज्यध्वं सुनुत|	be harnessed to the shafts and press.
गरावाणो अप दुछुनामप सेधत दुर्मतिम|	stones drive calamity away drive ye away malevolence.
उस्राः कर्तनभेषजम|	make ye the cows our medicine.
गरावाण उपरेष्वा महीयन्ते सजोषसः|	of one accord the upper stones giving the bull his bulllike strength.
वर्ष्णेदधतो वर्ष्ण्यम|	look down with pride on those below.
गरावाणः सविता नु वो देवः सुवतु धर्मणा|	may savitar the god o stones stir you as law commands for him.
यजमानाय सुन्वते|	who sacrifices pouring juice.
अपेहि मनसस पतेअप कराम परश्चर|	avaunt thou master of the mind depart and vanish far away.
परो निरतया आचक्ष्व बहुधा जीवतो मनः|	look on destruction far from hence the live mans mind is manifold.
भद्रं वै वरं वर्णते भद्रं युञ्जन्ति दक्षिणम|	a happy boon do men elect a mighty blessing they obtain.
भद्रं वैवस्वते चक्षुर्बहुत्रा जीवतो मनः|	bliss with vaivasvata they see the live mans mind seeks many a place.
यदाशसा निःशसाभिशसोपारिम जाग्रतो यत सवपन्तः|	if by address by blame by imprecation we have committed sin awake or sleeping.
अग्निर्विश्वान्यप दुष्क्र्तान्यजुष्टान्यारे अस्मद्दधातु|	all hateful acts of ours all evil doings may agni bear away to distant places.
यदिन्द्र बरह्मणस पतेअभिद्रोहं चरामसि|	when indra brahmaṇaspati our deeds are wrongful and unjust.
परचेता नाङगिरसो दविषतां पात्यंहसः|	may provident aṅgirasa prevent our foes from troubling us.
अजैष्माद्यासनाम चाभूमानागसो वयम|	we have prevailed this day and won we are made free from sin and guilt.
जाग्रत्स्वप्नःसंकल्पः पापो यं दविष्मस्तं स रछतु यो नो दवेष्टितं रछतु|	ill thoughts that visit us awake or sleeping seize the man we hate yea seize the man who hateth us.
सहस्रशीर्षा पुरुषः सहस्राक्षः सहस्रपात|	a thousand heads hath puruṣa a thousand eyes a thousand feet.
सभूमिं विश्वतो वर्त्वात्यतिष्ठद दशाङगुलम|	on every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide.
पुरुष एवेदं सर्वं यद भूतं यच्च भव्यम|	this puruṣa is all that yet hath been and all that is to be.
उताम्र्तत्वस्येशानो यदन्नेनातिरोहति|	the lord of immortality which waxes greater still by food.
एतावानस्य महिमातो जयायांश्च पूरुषः|	so mighty is his greatness yea greater than this is puruṣa.
पादोअस्यविश्वा भूतानि तरिपादस्याम्र्तं दिवि|	all creatures are onefourth of him threefourths eternal life in heaven.
तरिपादूर्ध्व उदैत पुरुषः पादोअस्येहाभवत पुनः|	with threefourths puruṣa went up onefourth of him again was here.
ततो विष्वं वयक्रामत साशनानशने अभि|	thence he strode out to every side over what cats not and what cats.
तस्माद विराळ अजायत विराजो अधि पूरुषः|	from him virāj was born again puruṣa from virāj was born.
स जातोत्यरिच्यत पश्चाद भूमिमथो पुरः|	as soon as he was born he spread eastward and westward oer the earth.
यत पुरुषेण हविषा देवा यज्ञमतन्वत|	when gods prepared the sacrifice with puruṣa as their offering.
वसन्तोस्यासीदाज्यं गरीष्म इध्मः शरद धविः|	its oil was spring the holy gift was autumn summer was the wood.
तं यज्ञं बर्हिषि परौक्षन पुरुषं जातमग्रतः|	they balmed as victim on the grass puruṣa born in earliest time.
तेन देवा अयजन्त साध्या रषयश्च ये|	with him the deities and all sādhyas and Ṛṣis sacrificed.
तस्माद यज्ञात सर्वहुतः सम्भ्र्तं पर्षदाज्यम|	from that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was gathered up.
पशून्तांश्चक्रे वायव्यानारण्यान गराम्याश्च ये|	he formed the creatures ofthe air and animals both wild and tame.
तस्माद यज्ञात सर्वहुत रचः सामानि जज्ञिरे|	from that great general sacrifice Ṛcas and sāmahymns were born.
छन्दांसिजज्ञिरे तस्माद यजुस्तस्मादजायत|	therefrom were spells and charms produced the yajus had its birth from it.
तस्मादश्वा अजायन्त ये के चोभयादतः|	from it were horses born from it all cattle with two rows of teeth.
गावो हजज्ञिरे तस्मात तस्माज्जाता अजावयः|	from it were generated kine from it the goats and sheep were born.
यत पुरुषं वयदधुः कतिधा वयकल्पयन|	when they divided puruṣa how many portions did they make.
मुखं किमस्य कौ बाहू का ऊरू पादा उच्येते|	what do they call his mouth his arms what do they call his thighs and feet.
बराह्मणोअस्य मुखमासीद बाहू राजन्यः कर्तः|	the brahman was his mouth of both his arms was the rājanya made.
ऊरूतदस्य यद वैश्यः पद्भ्यां शूद्रो अजायत|	his thighs became the vaiśya from his feet the Śūdra was produced.
चन्द्रमा मनसो जातश्चक्षोः सूर्यो अजायत|	the moon was gendered from his mind and from his eye the sun had birth.
मुखादिन्द्रश्चाग्निश्च पराणाद वायुरजायत|	indra and agni from his mouth were born and vāyu from his breath.
नाभ्या आसीदन्तरिक्षं शीर्ष्णो दयौः समवर्तत|	forth from his navel came midair the sky was fashioned from his head.
पद्भ्यां भूमिर्दिशः शरोत्रात तथा लोकानकल्पयन|	earth from his feet and from his car the regions thus they formed the worlds.
सप्तास्यासन परिधयस्त्रिः सप्त समिधः कर्ताः|	seven fencingsticks had he thrice seven layers of fuel were prepared.
देवायद यज्ञं तन्वाना अबध्नन पुरुषं पशुम|	when the gods offering sacrifice bound as their victim puruṣa.
यज्ञेन यज्ञमयजन्त देवास्तानि धर्माणि परथमान्यासन|	gods sacrificing sacrificed the victim these were the earliest holy ordinances.
ते ह नाकं महिमानः सचन्त यत्र पूर्वे साध्याःसन्ति देवाः|	the mighty ones attained the height of heaven there where the sādhyas gods of old are dwelling.
नि वर्तध्वं मानु गातास्मान सिषक्त रेवतीः|	turn go not farther on your way visit us o ye wealthy ones.
अग्नीषोमापुनर्वसू अस्मे धारयतं रयिम|	agni and soma ye who bring riches again secure us wealth.
पुनरेना नि वर्तय पुनरेना नया कुरु|	make these return to us again bring them beside us once again.
इन्द्र एणा नियछत्वग्निरेना उपाजतु|	may indra give them back to us and agni drive them hitherward.
पुनरेता नि वर्तन्तामस्मिन पुष्यन्तु गोपतौ|	let them return to us again under this herdsman let them feed.
इहैवाग्नेनि धारयेह तिष्ठतु या रयिः|	do thou o agni keep them here and let the wealth we have remain.
यन नियानं नययनं संज्ञानं यत परायणम|	call upon their herdsman him who knoweth well their coming nigh.
आवर्तनं निवर्तनं यो गोपा अपि तं हुवे|	their parting and their homereturn and watcheth their approach and rest.
य उदानड वययनं य उदानट परायणम|	yea let the herdsman too return who marketh well their drivingforth.
आवर्तनंनिवर्तनमपि गोपा नि वर्तताम|	marketh their wandering away their turning back and coming home.
आ निवर्त नि वर्तय पुनर्न इन्द्र गा देहि|	homeleader lead them home to us indra restore to us our kine.
जीवाभिर्भुनजामहै|	we will rejoice in them alive.
परि वो विश्वतो दध ऊर्जा घर्तेन पयसा|	offer you on every side butter and milk and strengthening food.
ये देवाः केच यज्ञियास्ते रय्या सं सर्जन्तु नः|	may all the holy deities pour down on us a flood of wealth.
आ निवर्तन वर्तय नि निवर्तन वर्तय|	o thou homeleader lead them home restore them thou who bringest home.
भूम्याश्चतस्रःप्रदिशस्ताभ्य एना नि वर्तय|	four are the quarters of the earth from these bring back to us our kine.
आ जनं तवेषसन्द्र्शं माहीनानामुपस्तुतम|	bringing our homage we have come to one magnificent in look.
अगन्मबिभ्रतो नमः|	glorified of the mighty gods.
असमातिं नितोशनं तवेषं निययिनं रथम|	to asamati spring of gifts lord of the brave a radiant car.
भजेरथस्य सत्पतिम|	the conqueror of bhajeratha.
यो जनान महिषानिवातितस्थौ पवीरवान|	who when the spear hath armed his hand or even weaponless oerthrows.
उतापवीरवान्युधा|	men strong as buffaloes in fight.
यस्येक्ष्वाकुरुप वरते रेवान मराय्येधते|	him in whose service flourishes iksvaku rich and dazzlingbright.
दिवीवपञ्च कर्ष्टयः|	as the five tribes that are in heaven.
इन्द्र कषत्रासमातिषु रथप्रोष्ठेषु धारय|	indra support the princely power of rathaprosthas matched by none.
दिवीवसूर्यं दर्शे|	even as the sun for all to see.
अगस्त्यस्य नद्भ्यः सप्ती युनक्षि रोहिता|	thou for agastyas sisters sons yokest thy pair of ruddy steeds.
पणीन नयक्रमीरभि विश्वान राजन्नराधसः|	thou troddest niggards under foot all those o king who brought no gifts.
अयं मातायं पितायं जीवातुरागमत|	this is the mother this the sire this one hath come to be thy life.
इदं तवप्रसर्पणं सुबन्धवेहि निरिहि|	what brings thee forth is even this now come subandhu get thee forth.
यथा युगं वरत्रया नह्यन्ति धरुणाय कम|	as with the leather thong they bind the chariot yoke to hold it fast.
एवादाधार ते मनो जीवातवे न मर्त्यवेअथो अरिष्टतातये|	so have i held thy spirit fast held it for life and not for death held it for thy security.
यथेयं पर्थिवी मही दाधारेमान वनस्पतीन|	even as this earth the mighty earth holds fast the monarchs of the wood.
एवादाधार ते मनो जीवातवे न मर्त्यवेअथो अरिष्टतातये|	so have i held thy spirit fast held it for life and not for death held it for thy security.
यमादहं वैवस्वतात सुबन्धोर्मन आभरम|	subandlins spirit i have brought from yarna from vivasvāns son.
जीवातवेन मर्त्यवेअथो अरिष्टतातये|	brought it for life and not for death yea brought it for security.
नयग वातोअव वाति नयक तपति सूर्यः|	the wind blows downward from on high downward the sungod sends his heat.
नीचीनमघ्न्यादुहे नयग भवतु ते रपः|	downward the milchcow pours her milk so downward go thy pain and grief.
अयं मे हस्तो भगवानयं मे भगवत्तरः|	felicitous is this mine hand yet more felicitous is this.
अयं मेविश्वभेषजोअयं शिवाभिमर्शनः|	this hand contains all healing balms and this makes whole with gentle touch.
अभ्रप्रुषो न वाचा परुषा वसु हविष्मन्तो न यज्ञाविजानुषः|	as with their voice from cloud they sprinkle treasure so are the wise mans liberal sacrifices.
सुमारुतं न बरह्माणमर्हसे गणमस्तोष्येषां न शोभसे|	i praise their company that merits worship as the good martits priest to pay them honour.
शरिये मर्यासो अञ्जीन्रक्र्ण्वत सुमरुतं न पूर्विरतिक्षपः|	the youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through many nightsthis noble band of maruts.
दिवस पुत्रास एता न येतिर आदित्यासस्ते अक्रन वाव्र्धुः|	like stags the sons of dyatis have striven onward the sons of aditi grown strong like pillars.
पर ये दिवः पर्थिव्य न बर्हणा तमना रिरिच्रे अभ्रान्न सूर्यः|	they who extend beyond the earth and heaven by their own mass as from the cloud spreads sūrya.
पाजस्वन्तो न वीराः पनस्यवो रिशादसो नमर्या अभिद्यवः|	like mighty heroes covetous of glory like heavenly gallants who destroy the wicked.
युष्माकं बुध्ने अपां न यामनि विथुर्यति न महीश्रथर्यति|	when ye come nigh as in the depth of waters the earth is loosened as it were and shaken.
विश्वप्सुर्यज्ञो अर्वागयं सु वःप्रयस्वन्तो न सत्राच आ गत|	this your allfeedin sacrifice approaches come all united fraught as twere with viands.
यूयं धूर्षु परयुजो न रश्मिभिर्ज्योतिष्मन्तो न भासाव्युष्टिषु|	ye are like horses fastened to the chariot poles luminous with your beams with splendour as at dawn.
शयेनासो न सवयशसो रिशादसः परवासोन परसितासः परिप्रुषः|	like selfbright falcons punishers of wicked men like hovering birds urged forward scattering rain around.
पर यद वहध्वे मरुतः पराकाद यूयं महःसंवरणस्य वस्वः|	when ye come forth o maruts from the distance from the great treasury of rich possessions.
विदानासो वसवो राध्यस्याराच्चिद्द्वेषः सनुतर्युयोत|	knowing o vasus boons that should be granted even from afar drive back the men who hate us.
य उद्र्चि यज्ञे अध्वरेष्ठा मरुद्भ्यो न मानुषो ददाशत|	he who engaged in the rites final duty brings as a man oblation to the maruts.
रेवत स वयो दधते सुवीरं स देवानामपि गोपीथेस्तु|	wins him lifes wealthy fulness blest with heroes he shall be present too where gods drink soma.
ते हि यज्ञेषु यज्ञियास ऊमा आदित्येन नाम्नाशम्भविष्ठाः|	for these are helps adored at sacrifices bringing good fortune by their name Ādityas.
ते नोअवन्तु रथतूर्मनीषां महश्चयामन्नध्वरे चकानाः|	speeding on cars let them protect our praises delighting in our sacrifice and worship.
अपश्यमस्य महतो महित्वममर्त्यस्य मर्त्यासु विक्षु|	i have beheld the might of this great being immortal in the midst of tribes of mortals.
नाना हनू विभ्र्ते सं भरेते असिन्वती बप्सती भूर्यत्तः|	his jaws now open and now shut together much they devour insatiately chewing.
गुहा शिरो निहितं रधगक्षी असिन्वन्नत्ति जिह्वयावनानि|	his eyes are turned away his head is hidden unsated with his tongue he eats the fuel.
अत्राण्यस्मै पड्भिः सं भरन्त्युत्तानहस्तानमसाधि विक्षु|	with hands upraised with reverence in the houses for him they quickly bring his food together.
पर मातुः परतरं गुह्यमिछन कुमारो न वीरुधःसर्पदुर्वीः|	seeking as twere his mothers secret bosom he like a child creeps on through widespread bushes.
ससं न पक्वमविदच्छुचन्तंरिरिह्वांसं रिप उपस्थे अन्तः|	one he finds glowing like hot food made ready and kissing deep within the earths recmes.
तद वां रतं रोदसी पर बरवीमि जायमानो मातरा गर्भोत्ति|	this holy law i tell you earth and heaven the infant at his birth dovours his parents.
नाहं देवस्य मर्त्यश्चिकेताग्निरङग विचेताः सप्रचेताः|	no knowledge of the god have i a mortal yea agni knoweth best for he hath wisdom.
यो अस्मा अन्नं तर्ष्वादधात्याज्यैर्घ्र्तैर्जुहोतिपुष्यति|	this man who quickly gives him food who offers his gifts of oil and butter and supports him.
तस्मै सहस्रमक्षभिर्वि चक्षेअग्ने विश्वतःप्रत्यंं असि तवम|	him with his thousand eyes he closely looks on thou showest him thy face from all sides agni.
किं देवेषु तयज एनश्चकर्थाग्ने पर्छामि नु तवामविद्वान|	agni hast thou committed sin or treason among the gods in ignorance i ask thee.
अक्रीळन करीळन हरिरत्तवेअदन वि पर्वशश्चकर्त गामिवासिः|	playing not playing he goldhued and toothless hath cut his food up as the knife a victim.
विषूचो अश्वान युयुजे वनेजा रजीतिभी रशनाभिर्ग्र्भीतान|	he born in wood hath yoked his horses rushing in all directions held with reins that glitter.
चक्षदे मित्रो वसुभिः सुजातः समान्र्धेपर्वभिर्वाव्र्धानः|	the wellborn friend hath carved his food with vasus in all his limbs he hath increased and prospered.
समिद्धो अद्य मनुषो दुरोणे देवो देवान यजसि जातवेदः|	thou in the house of man this day enkindled worshippest gods as god o jātavedas.
आ च वह मित्रमहश्चिकित्वान तवं दूतः कविरसिप्रचेताः|	observant bright as mitra bring them hither thou art a sapient and foreknowing envoy.
तनूनपात पथ रतस्य यानान मध्वा समञ्जन सवदयासुजिह्व|	tanūnapāt fairtongued with sweet meath balming the paths and waysof order make them pleasant.
मन्मानि धीभिरुत यज्ञं रन्धन देवत्रा चक्र्णुह्यध्वरं नः|	convey our sacrifice to heaven exalting with holy thoughts ourhymns of praise and worship.
आजुह्वान ईड्यो वन्द्यश्चा याह्यग्ने वसुभिः सजोषाः|	invoked deserving prayer and adoration o agni come accordant with the vasus.
तवं देवानामसि यह्व होता स एनान यक्षीषितो यजीयान|	thou art o youthful lord the gods invoker so best of sacrificers bring them quickly.
पराचीनं बर्हिः परदिशा पर्थिव्या वस्तोरस्या वर्ज्यतेग्रे अह्नाम|	by rule the sacred grass is scattered eastward a robe to clothe this earth when dawns are breaking.
वयु परथते वितरं वरीयो देवेभ्यो अदितयेस्योनम|	widely it spreads around and farextended fair for the gods and bringing peace and freedom.
वयचस्वतीरुर्विया वि शरयन्तां पतिभ्यो न जनयःशुम्भमानाः|	let the expansive doors be widely opened like wives who deck their beauty for their husbands.
देवीर्द्वारो बर्हतीर्विश्वमिन्वा देवेभ्योभवत सुप्रायणाः|	lofty celestial allimpelling portals admit the gods and give them easy entrance.
आ सुष्वयन्ती यजते उपाके उषासानक्ता सदतां नियोनौ|	pouring sweet dews let holy night and morning each close to each he seated at their station.
दिव्ये योषणे बर्हती सुरुक्मे अधि शरियंशुक्रपिशं दधाने|	lofty celestial dames with gold to deck them assuming all their fair and radiant beauty.
दैव्या होतारा परथमा सुवाचा मिमाना यज्ञं मनुषोयजध्यै|	come the two first celestial sweetvoiced hotars arranging sacrifice for man to worship.
परचोदयन्ता विदथेषु कारू पराचीनं जयोतिःप्रदिशा दिशन्ता|	as singers who inspire us in assemblies showing the eastward light with their direction.
आ नो यज्ञं भारती तूयमेत्विळा मनुष्वदिहचेतयन्ती|	let bhāratī come quickly to our worship and iḷā showing like a human being.
तिस्रो देवीर्बर्हिरेदं सयोनं सरस्वतीस्वपसः सदन्तु|	so let sarasvatī and both her fellows deft goddesses on this fair grass be seated.
य इमे दयावाप्र्थिवी जनित्री रूपैरपिंशद भुवनानिविश्वा|	hotar more skilled in sacrifice bring hither with speed today god tvaṣṭar thou who knowest.
तमद्य होतरिषितो यजीयान देवं तवष्टारमिह यक्षि विद्वान|	even him who formed these two the earth and heaven the parents with their forms and every creature.
उपावस्र्ज तमन्या समञ्जन देवानां पाथ रतुथाहवींषि|	send to our offerings which thyself thou balmest the companies of gods in ordered season.
वनस्पतिः शमिता देवो अग्निः सवदन्तु हव्यम्मधुना घर्तेन|	agni vanaspati the immolator sweeten our offered gift with meath and butter.
सद्यो जातो वयमिमीत यज्ञमग्निर्देवानामभवत्पुरोगाः|	agni as soon as he was born made ready the sacrifice and was the gods preceder.
अस्य होतुः परदिश्य रतस्य वाचि सवाहाक्र्तंहविरदन्तु देवाः|	may the gods cat our offering consecrated according to this true priests voice and guidance.
अग्निः सप्तिं वाजम्भरं ददात्यग्निर्वीरं शरुत्यंकर्मनिष्ठाम|	agni bestows the fleet prizewinning courser agni the hero famed and firm in duty.
अग्नी रोदसी वि चरत समञ्जन्नग्निर्नारीं वीरकुक्षिं पुरन्धिम|	agni pervades and decks the earth and heaven and fills the fruitful dame who teems with heroes.
अग्नेरप्नसः समिदस्तु भद्राग्निर्मही रोदसी आ विवेश|	blest be the wood that feeds the active agni within the two great worlds hath agni entered.
अग्निरेकं चोदयत समत्स्वग्निर्व्र्त्राणि दयते पुरूणि|	agni impels a single man to battle and with him rends in pieces many a foeman.
अग्निर्ह तयं जरतः कर्णमावाग्निरद्भ्यो निरदहज्जरूथम|	agni rejoiced the car of him who praised lim and from the waters burnt away jarutha.
अग्निरत्रिं घर्म उरुष्यदन्तरग्निर्न्र्मेधम्प्र जयास्र्जत सम|	agni saved atri in the fiery cavem and made nrmedha rich with troops of children.
अग्निर्दाद दरविणं वीरपेशा अग्निरषिं यः सहस्रासनोति|	agni hath granted wealth that decks the hero and sent the sage who wins a thousand cattle.
अग्निर्दिवि हव्यमा ततानाग्नेर्धामानिविभ्र्ता पुरुत्रा|	agni hath made oblations rise to heaven to every place are agnis laws extended.
अग्निमुक्थैरषयो वि हवयन्तेअग्निं नरो यामनिबाधितासः|	with songs of praise the Ṛṣis call on agni on agni heroes worsted in the foray.
अग्निं वयो अन्तरिक्षे पतन्तोअग्निः सहस्रापरि याति गोनाम|	birds flying in the region call on agni around a thousand cattle agni wanders.
अग्निं विश ईळते मानुषीर्या अग्निं मनुषो नहुषो विजाताः|	races of human birth pay agni worship men who have sprung from nahus line adore him.
अग्निर्गान्धर्वीं पथ्यां रतस्याग्नेर्गव्यूतिर्घ्र्त आ निषत्ता|	stablished in holy oil is agnis pasture on the gandharva path of law and order.
अग्नये बरह्म रभवस्ततक्षुरग्निं महामवोचामा सुव्र्क्तिम|	the Ṛbhus fabricated prayer for agni and we with mighty hymns have called on agni.
अग्ने पराव जरितारं यविष्ठाग्ने महि दरविणमायजस्व|	agni most youthful god protect the singer win us by worship agni great possessions.
मुञ्चामि तवा हविषा जीवनाय कमज्ञातयक्ष्मादुतराजयक्ष्मात|	for life i set thee free by this oblation from the unknown decline and from consumption.
गराहिर्जग्राह यदि वैतदेनं तस्यािन्द्राग्नी पर मुमुक्तमेनम|	or if the grasping demon have possessed him free him from her o indra thou and agni.
यदि कषितायुर्यदि वा परेतो यदि मर्त्योरन्तिकं नीतेव|	be his days ended be he now departed be he brought very near to death already.
तमा हरामि निरतेरुपस्थादस्पार्षमेनंशतशारदाय|	out of destructions lap again i bring him save him for life to last a hundred autumns.
सहस्राक्षेण शतशारदेन शतायुषा हविषाहार्षमेनम|	with hundredeyed oblation hundredautumned bringing a hundred lives have i restored him.
शतं यथेमं शरदो नयातीन्द्रो विश्वस्यदुरितस्य पारम|	that indra for a hundred years may lead him safe to the farther shore of all misfortune.
शतं जीव शरदो वर्धमानः शतं हेमन्ताञ्छतमुवसन्तान|	live waxing in thy strength a hundred autumns live through a hundred springs a hundred winters.
शतमिन्द्राग्नी सविता बर्हस्पतिः शतायुषाहविषेमं पुनर्दुः|	through hundredlived oblation indra agni bṛhaspati savitar yield him for a hundred.
आहार्षं तवाविदं तवा पुनरागाः पुनर्नव|	so have i found and rescued thee thou hast returned with youth renewed.
सर्वाङगसर्वं ते चक्षुः सर्वमायुश्च तेअविदम|	whole in thy members i have found thy sight and all thy life for thee.
पर हयछा मनीषा सपार्ह यन्ति नियुतः|	forward upon their way proceed the ready teams the lovely songs.
पर दस्रानियुद्रथः पूषा अविष्टु माहिनः|	further them glorious pūṣan with yoked chariot and the mighty twain.
यस्य तयन महित्वं वताप्यमयं जनः|	with sacred hymns let this man here this singer win the god to whom.
विप्र आ वंसद्धीतिभिश्चिकेत सुष्टुतीनाम|	belong this majesty and might he hath observed our eulogies.
स वेद सुष्टुतीनामिन्दुर्न पूष वर्षा|	pūṣan the strong hath knowledge of sweet praises even as indu hath.
अभि पसुरःप्रुषायति वरजं न आ परुषायति|	he dews our corn with moisture he bedews the pasture of our kine.
मंसीमहि तवा वयमस्माकं देव पूषन|	we will bethink ourselves of thee o pūṣan o thou god as one.
मत्मां चसाधनं विप्राणां चाधवम|	who brings fulfilment of our hymns and stirs the singer and the sage.
परत्यर्धिर्यज्ञनामश्वहयो रथानाम|	jointsharer of each sacrifice the driver of the chariot steeds.
रषिः स योमनुर्हितो विप्रस्य यावयत्सखः|	the Ṛṣi who is good to man the singers friend and faithful guard.
अधीषमाणायाः पतिः शुचायाश्च शुचस्य च|	one who is lord of suca lord of suca caring for herself.
वासोवयोअवीनामा वासांसि मर्म्र्जत|	weaving the raiment of the sheep and making raiment beautiful.
इनो वाजानां पतिरिनः पुष्टीनं सख|	the mighty lord of spoil and wealth strong friend of all prosperity.
पर शमश्रुहर्यतो दूधोद वि वर्थ यो अदाभ्यः|	he with light movement shakes his beard lovely and neer to be deceived.
आ ते रथस्य पूषन्नजा धुरं वव्र्त्युः|	o pūṣan may those goats of thine turn hitherward thy chariotpole.
विश्वस्यार्थिनः सखा सनोजा अनपच्युतः|	friend of all suppliants art thou born in old time and arm and sure.
अस्मकमुर्जा रथं पूषा अविष्टु माहिनः|	may the majestic pūṣan speed our chariot with his power and might.
भुवद्वजनां वर्ध इमं नः शर्णवद धवम|	may he increase our store of wealth and listen to this call of ours.
तवष्टा दुहित्रे वहतुं कर्णोतीतीदं विश्वं भुवनंसमेति|	tvastar prepares the bridal of his daughter all the world hears the tidings and assembles.
यमस्य माता पर्युह्यमाना महो जाया विवस्वतोननाश|	but yamas mother spouse of great vivasvān vanished as she was carried to her dwelling.
अपागूहन्नम्र्तां मर्त्येभ्यः कर्त्वी सवर्णामददुर्विवस्वते|	from mortal men they hid the immortal lady made one like her and gave her to vivasvān.
उताश्विनावभरद यत तदसीदजहादु दवामिथुना सरण्यूः|	saranyu brought to him the aśvin brothers and then deserted both twinned pairs of children.
पूषा तवेतश्च्यावयतु पर विद्वाननष्टपशुर्भुवनस्य गोपाः|	guard of the world whose cattle neer are injured may pūṣan bear thee hence for he hath knowledge.
स तवैतेभ्यः परि ददत पित्र्भ्योअग्निर्देवेभ्यः सुविदत्रियेभ्यः|	may he consign thee to these fathers keeping and to the gracious gods let agni give thee.
आयुर्विश्वायुः परि पासति तवा पूषा तवा पातु परपथेपुरस्तात|	may Āyu giver of all life protect thee and bear thee forward on the distant pathway.
यत्रसते सुक्र्तो यत्र ते ययुस्तत्र तवादेवः सविता दधातु|	thither let savitar the god transport thee where dwell the pious who have passedbefore thee.
पूषेमा आशा अनु वेद सर्वाः सो अस्मानभयतमेननेषत|	pūṣan knows all these realms may he conduct us by ways that are most free from fear and danger.
सवस्तिदा आघ्र्णिः सर्ववीरोअप्रयुछन पुर एतुप्रजानन|	giver of blessings glowing allheroic may he thewise and watchful go before us.
परपथे पथमजनिष्ट पूषा परपथे दिवः परपथेप्र्थिव्याः|	pūṣan was born to move on distant pathways on the road far from earth and far from heaven.
उभे अभि परियतमे सधस्थे आ च परा चचरति परजानन|	to both most wonted places of assembly he travels and returns with perfect knowledge.
सरस्वतीं देवयन्तो हवन्ते सरस्वतीमध्वरे तायमाने|	the pious call sarasvatī they worship sarasvatī while sacrifice proceedeth.
सरस्वतीं सुक्र्तो अह्वयन्त सरस्वती दाशुषे वार्यं दात|	the pious called sarasvatī aforetime sarasvatī send bliss to him who giveth.
सरस्वति या सरथं ययथ सवधाभिर्देवि पित्र्भिर्मदन्ती|	sarasvatī who camest with the fathers with them rejoicing thee in our oblations.
आसद्यास्मिन बर्हिषि मादयस्वानमीवा इष आधेह्यस्मे|	seated upon this sacred grass be joyful and give us strengthening food that brings no sickness.
सरस्वतीं यां पितरो हवन्ते दक्षिणा यज्ञमभिनक्षमाणाः|	thou called on as sarasvatī by fathers who come right forward to our solemn service.
सहस्रार्घमिळो अत्र भागं रायस्पोषं यजमानेषु धेहि|	give food and wealth to present sacrificers a portion worth a thousand of refreshment.
अपो अस्मान मातरः शुन्धयन्तु घर्तेन नो घर्तप्वः पुनन्तु|	the mother floods shall make us bright and shining cleansers of holy oil with oil shall cleanse us.
विश्वं हि रिप्रं परवहन्ति देविरुदिदाभ्यः शुचिरापूत एमि|	for goddesses they bear off all defilement i rise up from them purified and brightened.
दरप्सश्चस्कन्द परथमाननु दयूनिमं च योनिमनु यश्च पुर्वः|	through days of earliest date the drop descended on this place and on that which was before it.
समानं योनिमनु संचरन्तं दरप्सं जुहोम्यनु सप्त होत्राः|	i offer up throughout the seven oblations the drop which still to one same place is moving.
यस्ते दरप्स सकन्दति यस्ते अंशुर्बाहुच्युतो धिषणायाुपस्थात|	the drop that falls thy stalk which arms have shaken which from the bosom of the press hath fallen.
अध्वर्योर्वा परि वा यः पवित्रात तं ते जुहोमिमनसा वषट्क्र्तम|	or from the adhvaryus purifying filter i offer thee with heart and cry of vaṣaṭ.
यस्ते दरप्स सकन्नो यस्ते अंशुरवश्च यः परःस्रुचा|	that fallen drop of thine the stalk which from the ladle fell away.
अयं देवो बर्हस्पतिः सं तं सिञ्चतु राधसे|	this present god bṛhaspati shall pour it forth to make us rich.
पयस्वतीरोषधयः पयस्वन मामकं वचः|	the plants of earth are rich in milk and rich in milk is this my speech.
अपाम्पयस्वदित पयस्तेन मा सह शुन्धत|	and rich in milk the essence of the waters make me pure therewith.
यो यज्ञो विश्वतस्तन्तुभिस्तत एकशतं देवकर्मेभिरायतः|	the sacrifice drawn out with threads on every side stretched by a hundred sacred ministers and one.
इमे वयन्ति पितरो य आययुः पर वयाप वयेत्यासते तते|	this do these fathers weave who hitherward are come they sit beside the warp and cry weave forth weave back.
पुमानेनं तनुत उत कर्णत्ति पुमान वि तत्ने अधि नाकेस्मिन|	the man extends it and the man unbinds it even to this vault of heaven hath he outspun it.
इमे मयूखा उप सेदुरू सदः सामानि चक्रुस्तसराण्योतवे|	these pegs are fastened to the seat of worship they made the sāmahymns their weaving shuttles.
कासीत परमा परतिमा किं निदानमाज्यं किमासीत्परिधिः क आसीत|	what were the rule the order and the model what were the wooden fender and the butter.
छन्दः किमासीत परौगं किमुक्थंयद देवा देवमयजन्त विश्वे|	what were the hymn the chant the recitation when to the god all deities paid worship.
अग्नेर्गायत्र्यभवत सयुग्वोष्णिहया सविता सं बभूव|	closely was gāyatrī conjoined with agni and closely savitar combined with usnih.
अनुष्टुभा सोम उक्थैर्महस्वान बर्हस्पतेर्ब्र्हती वाचमावत|	brilliant with ukthas soma joined anustup bṛhaspatis voice by brhati was aided.
विराण मित्रावरुणयोरभिश्रीरिन्द्रस्य तरिष्टुब इहभागो अह्नः|	virāj adhered to varuṇa and mitra here triṣṭup day by day was indras portion.
विश्वान देवाञ जगत्या विवेश तेनचाक्ळिप्र रषयो मनुष्याः|	jagatī entered all the gods together so by this knowledge men were raised to Ṛṣis.
चाक्ळिप्रे तेन रषयो मनुष्या यज्ञे जाते पितरो नःपुराणे|	so by this knowledge men were raised to Ṛṣis when ancient sacrifice sprang up our fathers.
पश्यन मन्ये मनसा चक्षसा तान य इमंयज्ञमयजन्त पूर्वे|	with the minds eye i think that i behold them who first performed this sacrificial worship.
सहस्तोमाः सहछन्दस आव्र्तः सहप्रमा रषयः सप्तदैव्याः|	they who were versed in ritual and metre in hymns and rules were the seven godlike Ṛṣis.
पूर्वेषां पन्थामनुद्र्श्य धीरा अन्वालेभिरेरथ्यो न रश्मीन|	viewing the path of those of old the sages have taken up the reins like chariotdrivers.
समानमु तयं पुरुहूतमुक्थ्यं रथं तरिचक्रं सवनागनिग्मतम|	that general car of yours invoked by many a man that comes to our libations threewheeled meet for lauds.
परिज्मानं विदथ्यं सुव्र्क्तिभिर्वयंव्युष्टा उषसो हवामहे|	that circumambient car worthy of sacrifice we call with our pure hymns at earliest flush of dawn.
परातर्युजं नासत्याधि तिष्ठथः परातर्यावाणम्मधुवाहनं रथम|	ye o nāsatyas mount that earlyharnessed car that travels early laden with its freight of balm.
विशो येन गछथो यज्वरीर्नराकीरेश्चिद यज्ञं होत्र्मन्तमश्विना|	wherewith ye heroes visit clans who sacrifice even the poor mans worship where the priest attends.
अध्वर्युं वा मधुपाणिं सुहस्त्यमग्निधं वाध्र्तदक्षं दमूनसम|	if to the deft adhvaryu with the meath in hand or to the kindler firm in strength the household friend.
विप्रस्य वा यत सवननि गछथोऽत आ यातं मधुपेयमश्विना|	or to the sages poured libations ye approach come thence o aśvins now to drink the offered meath.
उदीरतामवर उत परास उन मध्यमाः पितरःसोम्यासः|	may they ascend the lowest highest midmost the fathers who deserve a share of soma.
असुं य ईयुरव्र्का रतज्ञास्ते नोअवन्तुपितरो हवेषु|	may they who have attained the life of spirits gentle and righteous aid us when we call them.
इदं पित्र्भ्यो नमो अस्त्वद्य ये पूर्वासो य उपरास ईयुः|	now let us pay this homage to the fathers to those who passed of old and those who followed.
ये पार्थिवे रजस्या निषत्ता ये वा नूनं सुव्र्जनासुविक्षु|	those who have rested in the earthly region and those who dwell among the mighty races.
आहं पितॄन सुविदत्रानवित्सि नपातं च विक्रमणं चविष्णोः|	have attained the graciousminded fathers i have gained son and progeny from viṣṇu.
बर्हिषदो ये सवधया सुतस्य भजन्त पित्वस्तैहागमिष्ठाः|	they who enjoy pressed juices with oblation seated on sacred grass come oftenest hither.
बर्हिषदः पितर ऊत्यर्वागिमा वो हव्या चक्र्मा जुषध्वम|	fathers who sit on sacred grass come help us these offerings have we made for you accept them.
त आ गतावसा शन्तमेनाथा नः शं योररपोदधात|	so come to us with most auspicious favour and give us health and strength without a trouble.
उपहूताः पितरः सोम्यासो बर्हिष्येषु निधिषु परियेषु|	may they the fathers worthy of the soma invited to their favourite oblations.
त आ गमन्तु त इह शरुवन्त्वधि बरुवन्तु तेअवन्त्वस्मान|	laid on the sacred grass come nigh and listen may they be gracious unto us and bless us.
आच्या जानु दक्षिणतो निषद्येमं यज्ञमभि गर्णीतविश्वे|	bowing your bended knees and seated southward accept this sacrifice of ours with favour.
मा हिंसिष्ट पितरः केन चिन नो यद व आगःपुरुषता कराम|	punish us not for any sin o fathers which we through human frailty have committed.
आसीनासो अरुणीनामुपस्थे रयिं धत्त दाशुषे मर्त्याय|	lapped in the bosom of the purple mornings give riches to the man who brings oblations.
पुत्रेभ्यः पितरस्तस्य वस्वः पर यछत त इहोर्जन्दधात|	grant to your sons a portion of that treasure and present give them energy ye fathers.
ये नः पूर्वे पितरः सोम्यासोअनूहिरे सोमपीथंवसिष्ठाः|	our ancient fathers who deserve the soma who came most noble to our soma banquet.
तेभिर्यमः संरराणो हवींष्युशन्नुशद्भिः परतिकाममत्तु|	with these let yama yearning with the yearning rejoicing eat our offerings at his pleasure.
ये तात्र्षुर्देवत्रा जेहमाना होत्राविद सतोमतष्टासोर्कैः|	come to us agni with the gracioug fathers who dwell in glowing light the very kavyas.
आग्ने याहि सुविदत्रेभिरर्वां सत्यैः कव्यैःपित्र्भिर्घर्मसद्भिः|	who thirsted mid the gods who hasten hither oblation winners theme of singers praises.
ये सत्यासो हविरदो हविष्पा इद्रेण देवैः सरथन्दधानाः|	come agni come with countless ancient fathers dwellers in light primeval godadorers.
आग्ने याहि सहस्रं देववन्दैः परैःपूर्वैः पित्र्भिर्घर्मसद्भिः|	eaters and drinkers of oblations truthful who travel with the deities and indra.
अग्निष्वात्ताः पितर एह गछत सदःसदः सदतसुप्रणीतयः|	fathers whom agnis flames have tasted come ye nigh ye kindly leaders take ye each your proper place.
अत्ता हवींषि परयतानि बर्हिष्यथारयिं सर्ववीरं दधातन|	eat sacrificial food presented on the grass grant riches with a multitude of hero sons.
तवमग्न ईळितो जातवेदोअवाड ढव्यानि सुरभीणिक्र्त्वी|	thou agni jātavedas when entreated didst bear the offerings which thou madest fragrant.
परादाः पित्र्भ्यः सवधया ते अक्षन्नद्धि तवन्देव परयता हवींषि|	and give them to the fathers who did cat them with svadha eat thou god the gifts we bring thee.
ये चेह पितरो ये च नेह यांश्च विद्म यानु च नप्रविद्म|	thou jātavedas knowest well the number of fathers who are here and who are absent.
तवं वेत्थ यति ते जातवेदः सवधाभिर्यज्ञं सुक्र्तं जुषस्व|	of fathers whom we know and whom we know not accept the sacrifice wellprepared with portions.
ये अग्निदग्धा ये अनग्निदग्धा मध्ये दिवः सवधयामादयन्ते|	they who consumed by fire or not cremated joy in their offering in the midst of heaven.
तेभिः सवराळ असुनीतिमेतां यथावशन्तन्वं कल्पयस्व|	grant them o sovran lord the world of spirits and their own body as thy pleasure wills it.
परथश्च यस्य सप्रथश्च नमानुष्टुभस्य हविषोहविर्यत|	vasiṢṬha mastered the rathantara took it from radiant dhātar savitar and viṣṇu.
धातुर्द्युतानात सवितुश्च विष्णो रथन्तरमा जभारा वसिष्ठः|	oblation portion of fourfold oblation known by the names of saprathas and prathas.
अविन्दन ते अतिहितं यदासीद यज्ञस्य धाम परमंगुहा यत|	these sages found what lay remote and hidden the sacrifices loftiest secret essence.
धातुर्द्युतानात सवितुश्च विष्णोर्भरद्वाजो बर्हदा चक्रे अग्नेः|	from radiant dhātar savitar and viṣṇu from agni bharadvāja brought the brhat.
तेअविन्दन मनसा दीध्याना यजु षकन्नं परथमन्देवयानम|	they found with mental eyes the earliest yajus a pathway to the gods that had descended.
धातुर्द्युतानात सवितुश्च विष्णोरासूर्यादभरन घर्ममेते|	from radiant dhātar savitar and viṣṇu from sūrya did these sages bring the gharma.
न वा उ देवाः कषुधमिद वधं ददुरुताशितमुपगछन्ति मर्त्यवः|	the gods have not ordained hunger to be our death even to the wellfed man comes death in varied shape.
उतो रयिः पर्णतो नोप दस्यत्युताप्र्णन्मर्डितारं न विन्दते|	the riches of the liberal never waste away while he who will not give finds none to comfort him.
य आध्राय चकमानाय पित्वोअन्नवान सन्रफितायोपजग्मुषे|	the man with food in store who when the needy comes in miserable case begging for bread to eat.
सथिरं मनः कर्णुते सेवते पुरोतोचित स मर्डितारं न विन्दते|	hardens his heart against himeven when of old he did him servicefinds not one to comfort him.
स इद भोजो यो गर्हवे ददात्यन्नकामाय चरते कर्शाय|	bounteous is he who gives unto the beggar who comes to him in want of food and feeble.
अरमस्मै भवति यामहूता उतापरीषु कर्णुते सखायम|	success attends him in the shout of battle he makes a friend of him in future troubles.
न स सखा यो न ददाति सख्ये सचाभुवे सचमानायपित्वः|	no friend is he who to his friend and comrade who comes imploring food will offer nothing.
अपास्मात परेयान न तदोको अस्ति पर्णन्तमन्यमरणं चिदिचःेत|	let him departno home is that to rest in and rather seek a stranger to support him.
पर्णीयादिन नाधमानाय तव्यान दराघीयांसमनुपश्येत पन्थाम|	let the rich satisfy the poor implorer and bend his eye upon a longer pathway.
ओ हि वर्तन्ते रथ्येव चक्रान्यमअन्यमुप तिष्ठन्त रायः|	riches come now to one now to another and like the wheels of cars are ever rolling.
मोघमन्नं विन्दते अप्रचेताः सत्यं बरवीमि वध इत सतस्य|	the foolish man wins food with fruitless labour that food i speak the truth shall be his ruin.
नार्यमणं पुष्यति नो सखायं केवलाघो भवतिकेवलादी|	he feeds no trusty friend no man to love him all guilt is he who eats with no partaker.
कर्षन्नित फाल आशितं कर्णोति यन्नध्वानमप वर्ङकतेचरित्रैः|	the ploughshare ploughing makes the food that feeds us and with its feet cuts through the path it follows.
वदन बरह्मावदतो वनीयान पर्णन्नापिरप्र्णन्तमभि षयात|	better the speaking than the silent brahman the liberal friend outyalues him who gives not.
एकपाद भूयो दविपदो वि चक्रमे दविपात तरिपादमभ्येतिपश्चात|	he with one foot hath far outrun the biped and the twofooted catches the threefooted.
चतुष्पादेति दविपदामभिस्वरे सम्पश्यन्पङकतीरुपतिष्ठमानः|	fourfooted creatures come when bipeds call them and stand and look where five are met together.
समौ चिद धस्तौ न समं विविष्टः सम्मातरा चिन नसमं दुहाते|	the hands are both alike their labour differs the yield of sister milchkine is unequal.
यमयोश्चिन न समा वीर्याणि जञाती चित्सन्तौ न समं पर्णीतः|	twins even diffier in their strength and vigour two even kinsmen differ in their bounty.
पर नूनं जातवेदसमश्वं हिनोत वाजिनम|	now send ye jātavedas forth send hitherward the vigorous steed.
इदं नोबर्हिरासदे|	to seat him on our sacred grass.
अस्य पर जातवेदसो विप्रवीरस्य मीळुषः|	i raise the lofty eulogy of jātavedas raining boons.
महीमियर्मिसुष्टुतिम|	with sages for his hero band.
या रुचो जातवेदसो देवत्रा हव्यवाहनीः|	with flames of jātavedas which carry oblation to the gods.
ताभिर्नोयज्ञमिन्वतु|	may he promote our sacrifice.
उदसौ सूर्यो अगादुदयं मामको भगः|	yon sun hath mounted up and this my happy fate hate mounted high.
अहं तद्विद्वला पतिमभ्यसाक्षि विषासहिः|	i knowing this as conqueror have won my husband for mine own.
अहं केतुरहं मूर्धाहमुग्रा विवाचनी|	i am the banner and the head a mighty arbitress am i.
ममेदनुक्रतुं पतिः सेहानाया उपाचरेत|	i am victorious and my lord shall be submissive to my will.
मम पुत्राः शत्रुहणोअथो मे दुहिता विराट|	my sons are slayers of the foe my daughter is a ruling queen.
उताहमस्मि संजया पत्यौ मे शलोक उत्तमः|	i am victorious oer my lord my song of triumph is supreme.
येनेन्द्रो हविषा कर्त्व्यभवद दयुम्न्युत्तमः|	oblation that which indra gave and thus grew glorious and most high.
इदं तदक्रि देवा असपत्ना किलाभुवम|	this have i offered o ye gods and rid me of each rival wife.
असपत्ना सपत्नघ्नी जयन्त्यभिभूवरी|	destroyer of the rival wife sole spouse victorious conqueror.
आव्र्क्षमन्यासां वर्चो राधो अस्थेयसामिव|	the others glory have i seized as twere the wealth of weaker dames.
समजैषमिमा अहं सपत्नीरभिभूवरी|	i have subdued as conqueror these rivals these my fellowwives.
यथाहमस्य वीरस्य विराजानि जनस्य च|	that i may hold imperial sway over this hero and the folk.
भद्रं नो अपि वातय मनः|	send unto us a good and happy mind.
अग्निमीळे भुजां यविष्ठं शासा मित्रं दुर्धरीतुम|	worship agni youthfullest of gods resistless friend of laws.
यस्य धर्मन सवरेनीः सपर्यन्ति मातुरूधः|	under whose guard and heavenly light the spotted seek the mothers breast.
यमासा कर्पनीळं भासाकेतुं वर्धयन्ति|	whom with their mouth they magnify bannered with flame and homed in light.
भराजतेश्रेणिदन|	he glitters with his row of teeth.
अर्यो विशां गातुरेति पर यदानड दिवो अन्तान|	kind furtherer of men he comes when he hath reached the ends of heaven.
कविरभ्रं दिद्यानः|	sage giving splendour to the clouds.
जुषद धव्या मानुषस्योर्ध्वस्तस्थाव रभ्वा यज्ञे|	to taste mans offerings he the strong hath risen erect at sacrifice.
मिन्वन सद्म पुर एति|	fixing his dwelling he proceeds.
स हि कषेमो हविर्यज्ञः शरुष्टीदस्य गातुरेति|	here are oblation worship rest rapidly comes his furtherance.
अग्निं देवा वाशीमन्तम|	to swordarmed agni come the gods.
यज्ञासाहं दुव इषेअग्निं पूर्वस्य शेवस्य|	with service for chief bliss i seek the lord of sacrifice agni whom.
अद्रेःसूनुमायुमाहुः|	they call the living son of cloud.
नरो ये के चास्मदा विश्वेत ते वाम आ सयुः|	blest evermore be all the men who come from us who magnify.
अग्निंहविषा वर्धन्तः|	agni with sacrificial gifts.
कर्ष्णः शवेतोअरुषो यामो अस्य बरध्न रज्र उत शोणोयशस्वान|	the path he treads is black and white and red and striped and brown crimson and glorious.
हिरण्यरूपं जनिता जजान|	his sire begat him bright with hues of gold.
एवा ते अग्ने विमदो मनीषामूर्जो नपादम्र्तेभिःसजोषाः|	thus with his thoughts o son of strength o agni hath vimada accordant with the immortals.
गिर आ वक्षत सुमतीरियान इषमूर्जंसुक्षितिं विश्वमाभाः|	offered thee hymns soliciting thy favour thou hast brought all food strength a prosperous dwelling.
नासदासीन नो सदासीत तदानीं नासीद रजो नो वयोमापरो यत|	then was not nonexistent nor existent there was no realm of air no sky beyond it.
किमावरीवः कुह कस्य शर्मन्नम्भः किमासीद गहनं गभीरम|	what covered in and where and what gave shelter was water there unfathomed depth of water.
न मर्त्युरासीदम्र्तं न तर्हि न रात्र्या अह्न आसीत्प्रकेतः|	death was not then nor was there aught immortal no sign was there the days and nights divider.
आनीदवातं सवधया तदेकं तस्माद्धान्यन न परः किं चनास|	that one thing breathless breathed by its own nature apart from it was nothing whatsoever.
तम आसीत तमसा गूळमग्रेअप्रकेतं सलिलं सर्वमािदम|	darkness there was at first concealed in darkness this all was indiscriminated chaos.
तुछ्येनाभ्वपिहितं यदासीत तपसस्तन्महिनाजायतैकम|	all that existed then was void and form less by the great power of warmth was born that unit.
कामस्तदग्रे समवर्तताधि मनसो रेतः परथमं यदासीत|	thereafter rose desire in the beginning desire the primal seed and germ of spirit.
सतो बन्धुमसति निरविन्दन हर्दि परतीष्याकवयो मनीषा|	sages who searched with their hearts thought discovered the existents kinship in the nonexistent.
तिरश्चीनो विततो रश्मिरेषामधः सविदासीअअअत|	transversely was their severing line extended what was above it then and what below it.
रेतोधाासन महिमान आसन सवधा अवस्तात परयतिः परस्तात|	there were begetters there were mighty forces free action here and energy up yonder.
को अद्धा वेद क इह पर वोचत कुत आजाता कुत इयंविस्र्ष्टिः|	who verily knows and who can here declare it whence it was born and whence comes this creation.
अर्वाग देवा अस्य विसर्जनेनाथा को वेद यताबभूव|	the gods are later than this worlds production who knows then whence it first came into being.
इयं विस्र्ष्टिर्यत आबभूव यदि वा दधे यदि वा न|	he the first origin of this creation whether he formed it all or did not form it.
यो अस्याध्यक्षः परमे वयोमन सो अङग वेद यदि वा नवेद|	whose eye controls this world in highest heaven he verily knows it or perhaps he knows not.
सोम एकेभ्यः पवते घर्तमेक उपासते|	for some is soma purified some sit by sacrificial oil.
येभ्यो मधुप्रधावति तांश्चिदेवापि गछतात|	to those for whom the meath flows forth even to those let him depart.
तपसा ये अनाध्र्ष्यास्तपसा ये सवर्ययुः|	invincible through fervour those whom fervour hath advanced to heaven.
तपो येचक्रिरे महस्तांश्चिदेवापि गछतात|	who showed great fervour in their lives even to those let him depart.
ये युध्यन्ते परधनेषु शूरासो ये तनूत्यजः|	the heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives away.
ये वासहस्रदक्षिणास्तांश्चिदेवापि गछतात|	or who give guerdon thousandfold even to those let him depart.
ये चित पूर्व रतसाप रतावान रताव्र्धः|	yea the first followers of law laws pure and holy strengtheners.
पितॄन तपस्वतोयम तांश्चिदेवापि गछतात|	the fathers yama fervourmovedeven to those let him depart.
सहस्रणीथाः कवयो ये गोपायन्ति सूर्यम|	skilled in a thousand ways and means the sages who protect the sun.
रषीन्तपस्वतो यम तपोजानपि गछतात|	the Ṛṣis yama fervourmovedeven to those let him depart.
महि दयावाप्र्थिवी भूतमुर्वी नारी यह्वी न रोदसीसदं नः|	mighty are ye and farextended heaven and earth both worlds are evermore to us like two young dames.
तेभिर्नः पातं सह्यस एभिर्नः पातंशूषणि|	guard us thereby from stronger foe guard us hereby to give us strength.
यज्ञेयज्ञे स मर्त्यो देवान सपर्यति|	in each succeeding sacrifice that mortal honoureth the gods.
यः सुम्नैर्दीर्घश्रुत्तम आविवासत्येनान|	he who most widely known and famed for happiness inviteth them.
विश्वेषामिरज्यवो देवानां वार्महः|	ye who are rulers over all great is your sovran power as gods.
विश्वे हिविश्वमहसो विश्वे यज्ञेषु यज्ञियाः|	ye all possess all majesty all must be served in sacrifice.
ते घा राजानो अम्र्तस्य मन्द्रा अर्यमा मित्रो वरुणःपरिज्मा|	these are the joyous kings of immortality parijman mitra aryaman and varuṇa.
कद रुद्रो नर्णां सतुतो मरुतः पूषणो भगः|	what else is rudra praised of men the maruts bhaga pūṣaṇa.
उत नो नक्तमपां वर्षण्वसू सूर्यामासा सदनायसधन्या|	come also to our dwelling lords of ample wealth common partakers of our waters sun and moon.
सचा यत साद्येषामहिर्बुध्नेषु बुध्न्यः|	when the great dragon of the deep hath settled down upon their floors.
उत नो देवावश्विना शुभस पती धामभिर्मित्रावरुणाुरुष्यताम|	and let the aśvins lords of splendour set us freeboth gods and with their laws mitra and varuṇa.
महः स राय एषतेअति धन्वेव दुरिता|	through woes as over desert lands he speeds to ample opulence.
उत नो रुद्रा चिन मर्ळतामश्विना विश्वे देवासो रथस्पतिर्भगः|	yea let the aśvins twain he gracious unto us even rudras and all gods bhaga rathaspati.
रभुर्वाज रभुक्षणः परिज्मा विश्ववेदसः|	parijman Ṛbhu vāja o lords of all wealth Ṛbhukṣaṇas.
रभुरभुक्षा रभुर्विधतो मद आ ते हरी जूजुवानस्यवाजिना|	prompt is Ṛbhukṣan prompt the worshippers strong drink may thy fleet bay steeds thine who speedest on approach.
दुष्टरं यस्य साम चिद रधग यज्ञो नमानुषः|	not mans but gods is sacrifice whose psalm is unassailable.
कर्धी नो अह्रयो देव सवितः स च सतुषे मघोनाम|	o god savitar harmed by none lauded give us a place among wealthy princes.
सहो नैन्द्रो वह्निभिर्न्येषां चर्षणीनां चक्रं रश्मिं नयोयुवे|	with his carsteeds at once hath our indra guided the reins and the car of these men.
ऐषु दयावाप्र्थिवी धातं महदस्मे वीरेषु विश्वचर्षणिश्रवः|	to these men present here o heaven and earth to us grant lofty fame extending over all mankind.
पर्क्षं वाजस्य सातये पर्क्षं रायोततुर्वणे|	give us a steed to win us strength a steed with wealth for victory.
एतं शंसमिन्द्रास्मयुष टवं कूचित सन्तं सहसावन्नभिष्टये सदा पाह्यभिष्टये|	this speaker indrafor thou art our friendwherever he may be guard thou victor for help ever for help.
मेदतां वेदता वसो|	thy wisdom vasu prosper him.
एतं मे सतोमं तना न सूर्ये दयुतद्यामानं वाव्र्धन्तन्र्णाम|	so have they strengthened this mine hymn which seems to take its bright path to the sun and reconciles the men.
संवननं नाश्व्यं तष्टेवानपच्युतम|	thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses not to be displaced.
वावर्त येषां राया युक्तैषां हिरण्ययी|	whose chariotseat hath come again laden with wealth and bright with gold.
नेमधितान पौंस्या वर्थेव विष्टान्ता|	lightly with piercing ends as twere two ranks of heroes ranged for fight.
पर तद दुःशीमे पर्थवाने वेने पर रामे वोचमसुरेमघवत्सु|	this to duḥśīma pṛthavāna have i sung to vena rama to the nobles and the king.
ये युक्त्वाय पञ्च शतास्मयु पथा विश्राव्येषाम|	they yoked five hundred and their love of us was famed upon their way.
अधीन नवत्र सप्ततिं च सप्त च|	besides they showed us sevenandseventy horses here.
सद्यो दिदिष्ट तान्वःसद्यो दिदिष्ट पार्थ्यः सद्यो दिदिष्ट मायवः|	tānva at once displayed his gift pārthya at once displayed his gift and straightway māyava showed his.
पर वो महे मन्दमानायान्धसोअर्चा विश्वानरायविश्वाभुवे|	i laud your mighty one who joyeth in the juice him who is shared by all men who created all.
इन्द्रस्य यस्य सुमखं सहो महि शरवोन्र्म्णं च रोदसी सपर्यतः|	indra whose conquering strength is powerful in war whose fame and manly vigour heaven and earth revere.
सो चिन नु सख्या नर्य इन सतुतश्चर्क्र्त्य इन्द्रो मावतेनरे|	he with his friend is active lauded good to man indra who must be glorified by one like me.
विश्वासु धूर्षु वाजक्र्त्येषु सत्पते वर्त्रे वाप्स्वभि शूर मन्दसे|	hero lord of the brave all cars are thy delight warring with vṛtra or for waters or for spoil.
के ते नर इन्द्र ये त इषे ये ते सुम्नं सधन्यमियक्षान|	who are the men whom thou wilt further indra who strive to win thy bliss allied with riches.
के ते वाजायासुर्याय हिन्विरे के अप्सु सवासूर्वरासुपौंस्ये|	who urged thee forward to exert thy power divine to valour in the war for waters on their fields.
भुवस्त्वमिन्द्र बरह्मणा महान भुवो विश्वेषु सवनेषुयज्ञियः|	thou indra through the holy prayer art mighty worthy of sacrifice at all libations.
भुवो नॄंश्च्यौत्नो विश्वस्मिन भरेज्येष्ठश्च मन्त्रो विश्वचर्षणे|	in every fight thou castest heroes on the ground thou art the noblest song o lord of all the folk.
अवा नु कं जयायान यज्ञवनसो महीं त ओमात्रांक्र्ष्टयो विदुः|	help now as highest those who toil at sacrifice well do the people know thy great protecting might.
असो नु कमजरो वर्धाश्च विश्वेदेतासवना तूतुमा कर्षे|	thou shalt be everlasing giver of success yea on all these libations thou bestowest strength.
एता विश्वा सवना तूतुमाक्र्षे सवयं सूनो सहसो यानिदधिषे|	all these libations thou makest effectual of which thou art thyself supporter son of power.
वराय ते पात्रं धर्मणे तना यज्ञो मन्त्रोब्रह्मोद्यतं वचः|	therefore thy vessel is to be esteemed the best sacrifice holy text prayer and exalted speech.
ये ते विप्र बरह्मक्र्तः सुते सचा वसूनां च वसुनश्चदावने|	they who with flowing soma pray to thee o sage to pour on them thy gifts of opulence and wealth.
पर ते सुम्नस्य मनसा पथा भुवन मदे सुतस्यसोम्यस्यान्धसः|	may they come forward through their spirit on the path of bliss in the wild joy of soma juice effused.
यो वां परिज्मा सुव्र्दश्विना रथो दोषामुषासो हव्योहविष्मता|	as twere the name of father easy to invoke we all assembled here invoke this car of yours.
शश्वत्तमासस्तमु वामिदं वयं पितुर्ननाम सुहवं हवामहे|	aśvins your swiftlyrolling circumambient car which he who worships must invoke at eve and dawn.
चोदयतं सून्र्ताः पिन्वतं धिय उत पुरन्धीरीरयतन्तदुश्मसि|	awake all pleasant strains and let the hymns flow forth raise up abundant fulness this is our desire.
यशसं भागं कर्णुतं नो अश्विना सोमं नचारुं मघवत्सु नस कर्तम|	aśvins bestow on us a glorious heritage and give our princes treasure fair as soma is.
अमाजुरश्चिद भवथो युवं भगोअनाशोश्चिदवितारापमस्य चित|	ye are the bliss of her who groweth old at home and helpers of the slow although he linger last.
अन्धस्य चिन नासत्या कर्शस्य चिद युवामिदाहुर्भिषजा रुतस्य चित|	men call you too nāsatyas healers of the blind the thin and feeble and the man with broken bones.
युवं चयवानं सनयं यथा रथं पुनर्युवानंचरथाय तक्षथुः|	ye made cyavāna weak and worn with length of days young again like a car that he had power to move.
निष टौग्र्यमूहथुरद्भ्यस परिविश्वेत ता वां सवनेषु परवाच्या|	ye lifted up the son of tugra from the floods at our libations must all these your acts be praised.
पुराणा वां वीर्या पर बरवा जनेअथो हासथुर्भिषजामयोभुवा|	we will declare among the folk your ancient deeds heroic yea ye were physicians bringing health.
ता वां नु नव्याववसे करामहेअयंनासत्या शरदरिर्यथा दधत|	you you who must be lauded will we bring for aid so that this foe of ours o aśvins may believe.
इयं वामह्वे शर्णुतं मे अश्विना पुत्रायेव पितरा मह्यंशिक्षतम|	listen to me o aśvins i have cried to you give meyour aid as sire and mother aid their son.
अनापिरज्ञा असजात्यामतिः पुरा तस्याभिशस्तेरव सप्र्तम|	poor without kin or friend or ties of blood am i save me before it be too late from this my curse.
युवं रथेन विमदाय शुन्ध्युवं नयूहथुः पुरुमित्रस्ययोषणाम|	ye mounted on your chariot brought to vimada the comely maid of purumitra as a bride.
युवं हवं वध्रिमत्या अगछतं युवंसुषुतिं चक्रथुः पुरन्धये|	ye came unto the calling of the weaklings dame and granted noble offspring to the happy wife.
युवं विप्रस्य जरणामुपेयुषः पुनः कलेरक्र्णुतंयुवद वयः|	ye gave a ain the vigour of his youthful life to tge sage kali when old age was coming nigh.
युवं वन्दनं रश्यदादुदूपथुर्युवंसद्यो विश्पलामेतवे कर्थः|	ye rescued vandana and raised him from the pit and in a moment gave viśpalā power to move.
युवं ह रेभं वर्षणा गुहा हितमुदैरयतम्मम्र्वांसमश्विना|	ye aśvins twain endowed with manly strength brought forth reblia when hidden in the cave and wellnigh dead.
युवं रबीसमुत तप्तमत्रयोमन्वन्तं चक्रथुः सप्तवध्रये|	freed saptavadliri and for atri caused the pit heated with fire to be a pleasant restingplace.
युवं शवेतं पेदवेअश्विनाश्वं नवभिर्वाजैर्नवतीच वाजिनम|	on pedu ye bestowed aśvins a courser white mighty with nineandninety varied gifts of strength.
चर्क्र्त्यं ददथुर्द्रावयत्सखं भगं नन्र्भ्यो हव्यं मयोभुबम|	a horse to be renowned who bore his friend at speed joygiving bhagalike to be invoked of men.
न तं राजानावदिते कुतश्चन नांहो अश्नोति दुरितंनकिर्भयम|	from no side ye two kings whom none may check or stay doth grief distress or danger come u on the man.
यमश्विना सुहवा रुद्रवर्तनी पुरोरथंक्र्णुथः पत्न्या सह|	whom aśvins swift to hear borne on your glowing path ye with your consort make the foremost in the race.
आ तेन यातं मनसो जवीयसा रथं यं वां रभवश्चक्रुरश्विना|	come on that chariot which the Ṛbhus wrought for you the chariot aśvins that is speedier than thought.
यस्य योगे दुहिता जायते दिव उभे अहनीसुदिने विवस्वतः|	at harnessing whereof heavens daughter springs to birth and from vivasvān come auspicious night and day.
ता वर्तिर्यातं जयुषा वि पर्वतमपिन्वतं शयवेधेनुमश्विना|	come conquerors of the sundered mountain to our home aśvins who made the cow stream milk for Śayus sake.
वर्कस्य चिद वर्तिकामन्तरास्याद युवंशचीभिर्ग्रसिताममुञ्चतम|	ye who delivered even from the wolfs deep throat and set again at liberty the swallowed quail.
एतं वां सतोममश्विनावकर्मातक्षाम भर्गवो न रथम|	we have prepared this laud for you o aśvins and like the bhṛgus as a car have framed it.
नयम्र्क्षाम योषणां न मर्ये नित्यं न सूनुन्तनयं दधानाः|	have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom and brought it as a son our stay for ever.
अभीवर्तेन हविषा येनेन्द्रो अभिवाव्र्ते|	with offering for success in fight whence indra was victorious.
तेनास्मान्ब्रह्मणस पतेअभि राष्ट्राय वर्तय|	with this o brahmaṇaspati let us attain to royal sway.
अभिव्र्त्य सपत्नानभि या नो अरातयः|	subduing those who rival us subduing all malignities.
अभि पर्तन्यन्तन्तिष्ठाभि यो न इरस्यति|	withstand the man who menaces withstand the man who angers us.
अभि तवा देवः सविताभि सोमो अवीव्र्तत|	soma and savitar the god have made thee a victorious king.
अभि तवा विश्वाभूतान्यभीवर्तो यथाससि|	all elements have aided thee to make thee general conqueror.
येनेन्द्रो हविषा कर्त्व्यभवद दयुम्न्युत्तमः|	oblation that which indra gave and thus grew glorious and most high.
इदं तदक्रि देवा असपत्नः किलाभुवम|	this have i offered gods and hence now verily am rivalless.
असपत्नः सपत्नहाभिराष्ट्रो विषासहिः|	slayer of rivals rivalless victorious with royal sway.
यथाहमेषां भूतानां विराजानि जनस्य च|	over these beings may i rule may i be sovran of the folk.
मैनमग्ने वि दहो माभि शोचो मास्य तवचं चिक्षिपो माशरीरम|	burn him not up nor quite consume him agni let not his body or his skin be scattered.
यदा शर्तं कर्णवो जातवेदोअथेमेनं परहिणुतात पित्र्भ्यः|	o jātavedas when thou hast matured him then send him on his way unto the fathers.
शर्तं यदा करसि जातवेदोअथेमेनं परि दत्तात्पित्र्भ्यः|	when thou hast made him ready jātavedas then do thou give him over to the fathers.
यदा गछात्यसुनीतिमेतामथा देवानांवशनीर्भवाति|	when he attains unto the life that waits him he shall become the deities controller.
सूर्यं चक्षुर्गछतु वातमात्मा दयां च गछप्र्थिवीं च धर्मणा|	the sun receive thine eye tne wind thy spirit go as thy merit is to earth or heaven.
अपो वा गछ यदि तत्र ते हितमोषधीषु परति तिष्ठा शरीरैः|	go if it be thy lot unto the waters go make thine home in plants with all thy members.
अजो भागस्तपसा तं तपस्व तं ते शोचिस्तपतु तं तेर्चिः|	thy portion is the goat with heat consume him let thy fierce flame thy glowing splendour burn him.
यास्ते शिवास्तन्वो जातवेदस्ताभिर्वहैनंसुक्र्तामु लोकम|	with thine auspicious forms o jātavedas bear this man to the region of the pious.
अव सर्ज पुनरग्ने पित्र्भ्यो यस्त आहुतश्चरतिस्वधाभिः|	again o agni to the fathers send him who offered in thee goes with our oblations.
अयुर्वसान उप वेतु शेषः सं गछतान्तन्वा जातवेदः|	wearing new life let him increase his offspring let him rejoin a body jātavedas.
यत ते कर्ष्णः शकुन आतुतोद पिपीलः सर्प उत वाश्वापदः|	what wound soeer the dark bird hath inflicted the emmet or the serpent or the jackal.
अग्निष टद विश्वादगदं कर्णोतु सोमश्च योब्राह्मणानाविवेश|	may agni who devoureth all things heal it and soma who hath passed into the brahmans.
अग्नेर्वर्म परि गोभिर्व्ययस्व सं परोर्णुष्व पीवसामेदसा च|	shield thee with flesh against the flames of agni encompass thee about with fat and marrow.
नेत तवा धर्ष्णुर्हरसा जर्ह्र्षाणो दध्र्ग्विधक्ष्यन पर्यङखयाते|	so will the bold one eager to attack thee with fierce glow fail to girdle and consume thee.
इममग्ने चमसं मा वि जिह्वरः परियो देवानामुतसोम्यानाम|	forbear o agni to upset this ladle the gods and they who merit soma love it.
एष यश्चमसो देवपानस्तस्मिन देवा अम्र्तामादयन्ते|	this ladle this which serves the gods to drink from in this the immortal deities rejoice them.
करव्यादमग्निं पर हिणोमि दूरं यमराज्ञो गछतुरिप्रवाहः|	send afar flesh eating agni bearing off stains may he depart to yamas subjects.
इहैवायमितरो जातवेदा देवेभ्यो हव्यंवहतु परजानन|	but let this other jātavedas carry oblation to the gods for he is skilful.
यो अग्निः करव्यात परविवेश वो गर्हमिमं पश्यन्नितरंजातवेदसम|	i choose as god for fatherworship agni flesheater who hath past within your dwelling.
तं हरामि पित्र्यज्ञाय देवं स घर्ममिन्वात परमे सधस्थे|	while looking on this other jātavedas let him light flames in the supreme assembly.
यो अग्निः करव्यवाहनः पितॄन यक्षद रताव्र्धः|	with offerings meet let agni bring the fathers who support the law.
परेदुहव्यानि वोचति देवेभ्यश्च पित्र्भ्य आ|	let him announce oblations paid to fathers and to deities.
उशन्तस्त्वा नि धीमह्युशन्तः समिधीमहि|	right gladly would we set thee down right gladly make thee burn and glow.
उशन्नुशत आ वह पितॄन हविषे अत्तवे|	gladly bring yearning fathers nigh to cat the food of sacrifice.
यं तवमग्ने समदहस्तमु निर्वापया पुनः|	cool agni and again refresh the spot which thou hast scorched and burnt.
कियाम्ब्वत्र रोहतु पाकदूर्वा वयल्कशा|	here let the waterlily grow and tender grass and leafy herb.
शीतिके शीतिकावति हलादिके हलादिकावति|	o full of coolness thou cool plant full of fresh moisture freshening herb.
मण्डूक्या सुसं गम इमं सवग्निं हर्षय|	come hither with the female frog fill with delight this agni here.
आपो हि षठा मयोभुवस्ता न ऊर्जे दधातन|	ye waters are beneficent so help ye us to energy.
महेरणाय चक्षसे|	that we may look on great delight.
यो वः शिवतमो रसस्तस्य भजयतेह नः|	give us a portion of the sap the most auspicious that ye have.
उशतीरिवमातरः|	like mothers in their longing love.
तस्मा अरं गमाम वो यस्य कषयाय जिन्वथ|	to you we gladly come for him to whose abode ye send us on.
आपोजनयथा च नः|	and waters give us procreant strength.
शं नो देवीरभिष्टय आपो भवन्तु पीतये|	the waters be to us for drink goddesses for our aid and bliss.
शं योरभि सरवन्तु नः|	let them stream to us health and strength.
ईशाना वार्याणां कषयन्तीश्चर्षणीनाम|	beg the floods to give us balm these queens who rule oer precious things.
अपोयाचामि भेषजम|	and have supreme control of men.
अप्सु मे सोमो अब्रवीदन्तर्विश्वानि भेषजा|	within the waterssoma thus hath told medwell all balms that heal.
अग्निं चविश्वशम्भुवम|	and agni he who blesseth all.
आपः पर्णीत भेषजां वरूथं तन्वे मम|	o waters teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm.
जयोक चसूर्यं दर्शे|	so that i long may see the sun.
इदमापः पर वहत यत किं च दुरितं मयि|	whatever sin is found in me whatever evil i have wrought.
यद वाहमभिदुद्रोह यद व शेप उतान्र्तम|	if i have lied or falsely sworn waters remove it far from me.
आपो अद्यान्वचारिषं रसेन समगस्महि|	the waters i this day have sought and to their moisture have we come.
पयस्वानग्ना गहि तं मा सं सर्ज वर्चसा|	o agni rich in milk come thou and with thy splendour cover me.
अयं स यस्य शर्मन्नवोभिरग्नेरेधते जरिताभिष्टौ|	this is that agni he by whose protection favour and help the singer is successful.
जयेष्ठेभिर्यो भानुभिरषूणां पर्येति परिवीतोविभावा|	who with the noblest flames of glowing fuel comes forth encompassed with farspreading lustre.
यो भनुभिर्विभावा विभात्यग्निर्देवेभिरतावाजस्रः|	agni the holy one the everlasting who shines far beaming with celestial splendours.
आ यो विवाय सख्या सखिभ्योअपरिह्व्र्तो अत्यो न सप्तिः|	he who hath come unto his friends with friendship like a fleet steed who never trips or stumbles.
ईशे यो विश्वस्या देववीतेरीशे विश्वायुरुषसोव्युष्टौ|	he who is lord of all divine oblation shared by all living men at break of morning.
आ यस्मिन मना हवींष्यग्नावरिष्टरथस्कभ्नाति शूषैः|	agni to whom our offerings are devoted in whom rests he whose car through might is scatheless.
शूषेभिर्व्र्धो जुषाणो अर्कैर्देवानछा रघुपत्वाजिगाति|	increasing by his strength while lauds content him with easy flight unto the gods he travels.
मन्द्रो होता स जुह्वा यजिष्ठः सम्मिश्लो अग्निरा जिघर्ति देवान|	agni the cheerful priest best sacrificer balms with his tongue the gods with whom he mingles.
तमुस्रामिन्द्रं न रेजमानमग्निं गीर्भिर्नमोभिराक्र्णुध्वम|	with songs and adorations bring ye hither agni who stirs himself at dawn like indra.
आ यं विप्रासो मतिभिर्ग्र्णन्ति जातवेदसंजुह्वं सहानाम|	whom sages laud with hymns as jātavedas of those who wield the sacrificial ladle.
सं यस्मिन विश्वा वसूनि जग्मुर्वाजे नाश्वाःसप्तीवन्त एवैः|	in whom all goodly treasures meet together even as steeds and riders for the booty.
अस्मे ऊतीरिन्द्रवाततमा अर्वाचीनाग्न आ कर्णुष्व|	inclining hither bring us help o agni even assistance most desired by indra.
अधा हयग्ने मह्ना निषद्या सद्यो जज्ञानो हव्यो बभूथ|	yea at thy birth when thou hadst sat in glory thou agni wast the aim of invocations.
तं ते देवासो अनु केतमायन्नधावर्धन्त परथमासूमाः|	the gods came near obedient to thy sunimons and thus attained their rank as chief protectors.
वातस्य नु महिमानं रथस्य रुजन्नेति सतनयन्नस्यघोषः|	o the winds chariot o its power and glory crashing it goes and hath a voice of thunder.
दिविस्प्र्ग यात्यरुणानि कर्ण्वन्नुतो एति पर्थिव्यारेणुमस्यन|	it makes the regions red and touches heaven and as it moves the dust of earth is scattered.
सं परेरते अनु वातस्य विष्ठा ऐनं गछन्ति समनं नयोषाः|	along the traces of the wind they hurry they come to him as dames to an assembly.
ताभिः सयुक सरथं देव ईयतेअस्य विश्वस्यभुवनस्य राजा|	borne on his car with these for his attendants the god speeds forth the universes monarch.
अन्तरिक्षे पथिभिरीयमानो न नि विशते कतमच्चनाहः|	travelling on the paths of airs midregion no single day doth he take rest or slumber.
अपां सखा परथमजा रतावा कव सविज्जातः कुत आबभूव|	holy and earliestborn friend of the waters where did he spring and from what region came he.
आत्मा देवानां भुवनस्य गर्भो यथावशं चरति देवेषः|	germ of the world the deities vital spirit this god moves ever as his will inclines him.
घोषा इदस्य शर्ण्विरे न रूपं तस्मै वातायहविषा विधेम|	his voice is heard his shape is ever viewless let us adore this wind with our oblation.
बर्हस्पते परथमं वाचो अग्रं यत परैरत नामधेयन्दधानाः|	whenmen bṛhaspati giving names to objects sent out vāks first and earliest utterances.
यदेषां शरेष्ठं यदरिप्रमासीत्प्रेणा तदेषां निहितं गुहाविः|	all that was excellent and spotless treasured within them was disclosed through their affection.
सक्तुमिवतितउना पुनन्तो यत्र धीरा मनसा वाचमक्रत|	where like men cleansing cornflour in a cribble the wise in spirit have created language.
अत्रा सखायः सख्यानि जानते भद्रैषांलक्ष्मीर्निहिताधि वाचि|	friends see and recognize the marks of friendship their speech retains the blessed sign imprinted.
यज्ञेन वाचः पदवीयमायन तामन्वविन्दन्न्र्षिषुप्रविष्टाम|	with sacrifice the trace of vāk they foilowed and found her harbouring within the Ṛṣis.
तामाभ्र्त्या वयदधुः पुरुत्रा तां सप्तरेभा अभि सं नवन्ते|	they brought her dealt her forth in many places seven singers make her tones resound in concert.
उत तवः पश्यन न ददर्श वाचमुत तवः शर्ण्वन नश्र्णोत्येनाम|	one man hath neer seen vāk and yet he seeth one man hath hearing but hath never heard her.
उतो तवस्मै तन्वं वि सस्रे जायेव पत्यौशती सुवासाः|	but to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond welldressed woman to her husband.
उत तवं सख्ये सथिरपीतमाहुर्नैनं हिन्वन्त्यपिवाजिनेषु|	one man they call a laggard dull in friendship they never urge him on to deeds of valour.
अधेन्वा चरति माययैष वाचं शुश्रुवानफलामपुष्पाम|	he wanders on in profitless illusion the voice he heard yields neither fruitnor blossom.
यस्तित्याज सचिविदं सखायं न तस्य वाच्यपि भागोस्ति|	no part in vāk hath he who hath abandoned his own dear friend who knows the truth of friendship.
यदीं शर्णोत्यलकं शर्णोति नहि परवेद सुक्र्तस्यपन्थाम|	even if he hears her still in vain he listens naught knows he of the path of righteous action.
अक्षण्वन्तः कर्णवन्तः सखायो मनोजवेष्वसमाबभूवुः|	unequal in the quickness of their spirit are friends endowed alike with eyes and hearing.
आदघ्नास उपकक्षास उ तवे हरदा इव सनात्वा उत्वे दद्र्श्रे|	some look like tanks that reach the mouth or shoulder others like pools of water fit to bathe in.
हर्दा तष्टेषु मनसो जवेषु यद बराह्मणाः संयजन्तेसखायः|	when friendly brahmans sacrifice together with mental impulse which the heart hath fashioned.
अत्राह तवं वि जहुर्वेद्याभिरोहब्रह्माणो विचरन्त्यु तवे|	they leave one far behind through their attainments and some who count as brahmans wander elsewhere.
इमे ये नार्वां न परश्चरन्ति न बराह्मणासो नसुतेकरासः|	those men who step not back and move not forward nor brahmans nor preparers of libations.
त एते वाचमभिपद्य पापया सिरीस्तन्त्रं तन्वते अप्रजज्ञयः|	having attained to vāk in sinful fashion spin out their thread in ignorance like spinsters.
सर्वे नन्दन्ति यशसागतेन सभासाहेन सख्या सखायः|	all friends are joyful in the friend who cometh in triumph having conquered in assembly.
किल्बिषस्प्र्त पितुषणिर्ह्येषामरं हितो भवतिवाजिनाय|	he is their blameaverter foodprovider prepared is he and fit for deed of vigour.
रचां तवः पोषमास्ते पुपुष्वान गायत्रं तवो गायतिशक्वरीषु|	one plies his constant task reciting verses one sings the holy psalm in sakvari measures.
बरह्मा तवो वदति जातविद्यां यज्ञस्यमात्रां वि मिमीत उ तवः|	one more the brahman tells the lore of being and one lays down the rules of sacrificing.
असत सु मे जरितः साभिवेगो यत सुन्वते यजमनय शिक्षम|	this singer is my firm determination to aid the worshipper who pours the soma.
अनाशीर्दामहमस्मि परहन्ता सत्यध्व्र्तं वर्जिनायन्तमाभुम|	i slay the man who brings no milkoblation unrighteous powerful the truths perverter.
यदीदहं युधये संनयान्यदेवयून तन्वाशूशुजानान|	then will i when i lead my friends to battle against the radiant persons of the godless.
अमा ते तुम्रं वर्षभं पचानि तीव्रंसुतं पञ्चदशं नि षिञ्चम|	prepare for thee at home a vigorous bullock and pour for thee the fifteenfold strong juices.
नाहं तं वेद य इति बरवीत्यदेवयून समरणेजघन्वान|	i know not him who sayeth and declareth that he hath slain the godless in the battle.
यदावाख्यत समरणं रघावदादिद ध मेव्र्षभा पर बरुवन्ति|	soon as they see the furious combat raging men speak forth praises of my vigorous horses.
यदज्ञातेषु वर्जनेष्वासं विश्वे सतो मघवानो मासन|	while yet my deeds of might were unrecorded all passed for maghavans though i existed.
जिनामि वेत कषेम आ सन्तमाभुं पर तंक्षिणां पर्वते पादग्र्ह्य|	the potent one who dwelt in peace i conquered grasped by the foot and slew him on the mountain.
न वा उ मां वर्जने वारयन्ते न पर्वतासो यदहम्मनस्ये|	none hinder me in mine heroic exploits no not the mountains when i will and purpose.
मम सवनात कर्धुकर्णो भयात एवेदनु दयून्किरणः समेजात|	even the deaf will tremble at my roaring and every day will dust be agitated.
दर्शन नवत्र शर्तपाननिन्द्रान बाहुक्षदः शरवेपत्यमानान|	to see the indraless oblationdrinkers mean offerers oertaken by destruction.
घर्षुं वा ये निनिदुः सखायमध्यू नवेषु पवयो वव्र्त्युः|	then shall the fellies of my car pass over those who have blamed my joyous friend and scorned him.
अभूर्वौक्षीर्व्यु आयुरानड दर्षन नु पूर्वो अपरोनु दर्षत|	thou wast thou grewest to full vital vigour an earlier saw a later one shall see thee.
दवे पवस्ते परि तं न भूतो यो अस्य पारेरजसो विवेष|	two canopies as twere are round about him who reacheth to the limit of this region.
गावो यवं परयुता अर्यो अक्षन ता अपश्यं सहगोपाश्चरन्तीः|	the freed kine eat the barley of the pious  saw them as they wandered with the herdsman.
हवा इदर्यो अभितः समायन कियदासुस्वपतिश्छन्दयाते|	the calling of the pious rang around them what portion will these kine afford their owner.
सं यद वयं यवसादो जनानामहं यवाद उर्वज्रेन्तः|	when we who cat the grass of men are gathered i am with barleyeaters in the cornland.
अत्रा युक्तोअवसातारमिछादथो अयुक्तं युनजद्ववन्वान|	there shall the captor yoke the yokeless bullock and he who hath been yoked seek one to loose him.
अत्रेदु मे मंससे सत्यमुक्तं दविपाच्च यच्चतुष्पात्संस्र्जानि|	there wilt thou hold as true my spoken purpose to bring together quadrupeds and bipeds.
सत्रीभिर्यो अत्र वर्षणं पर्तन्यादयुद्धोस्य वि भजानि वेदः|	i will divide without a fight his riches who warreth here against the bull with women.
यस्यानक्षा दुहिता जात्वास कस्तां विद्वानभिमन्याते अन्धाम|	when a mans daughter hath been ever eyeless who knowing will be wroth with her for blindness.
कतरो मेनिं परति तं मुचाते य ईंवहाते य ईं वा वरेयात|	which of the two will loose on him his angerthe man who leads her home or he who woos her.
कियती योषा मर्यतो वधूयोः परिप्रीता पन्यसावार्येण|	how many a maid is pleasing to the suitor who fain would marry for her splendid riches.
भद्रा वधूर्भवति यत सुपेशाः सवयं सामित्रं वनुते जने चित|	if the girl be both good and fair of feature she finds herself a friend among the people.
पत्तो जगार परत्यञ्चमत्ति शीर्ष्णा शिरः परति दधौवरूथम|	his feet have grasped he eats the man who meets him around his head he sets the head for shelter.
आसीन ऊर्ध्वामुपसि कषिणाति नयंं उत्तानामन्वेति भूमिम|	sitting anear and right above he smites us and follows earth that lies spread out beneath him.
बर्हन्नछायो अपलाशो अर्वा तस्थौ माता विषितो अत्तिगर्भः|	high leafless shadowless and swift is heaven the mother stands the youngling loosed is feeding.
अन्यस्या वत्सं रिहती मिमाय कया भुवा निदधे धेनुरूधः|	loud hath she lowed licking anothers offspring in what world hath the cow laid down her udder.
सप्त वीरासो अधरादुदायन्नष्टोत्तरात्तात समजग्मिरन ते|	seven heroes from the nether part ascended and from the upper part came eight together.
नव पश्चातात सथिविमन्त आयन दश पराक्सानु वि तिरन्त्यश्नः|	nine from behind came armed with winnowingbaskets ten from the front pressed oer the rocks high ridges.
दशानामेकं कपिलं समानं तं हिन्वन्ति करतवेपार्याय|	one of the ten the tawny shared in common they send to execute their final purpose.
गर्भं माता सुधितं वक्षणास्ववेनन्तन्तुषयन्ती बिभर्ति|	the mother carries on her breast the infant of noble form and soothes it while it knows not.
पीवानं मेषमपचन्त वीरा नयुप्ता अक्षा अनु दीवासन|	the heroes dressed with fire the fatted wether the dice were thrown by way of sport and gaming.
दवा धनुं बर्हतीमप्स्वन्तः पवित्रवन्ता चरतःपुनन्ता|	two reach the plain amid the heavenly waters hallowing and with means of purifying.
वि करोशनासो विष्वञ्च आयन पचाति नेमो नहि पक्षदर्धः|	crying aloud they ran in all directions one half of them will cook and not the other.
अयं मे देवः सविता तदाह दर्वन्न इद वनवत्सर्पिरन्नः|	to me hath savitar this god declared it he will perform whose food is wood and butter.
अपश्यं गरामं वहमानमारादचक्रया सवधयावर्तमानम|	i saw a troop advancing from the distance moved not by wheels but their own godlike nature.
सिषक्त्यर्यः पर युगा जनानां सद्यःशिश्ना परमिनानो नवीयान|	the friendly one seeks human generations destroying still new bands of evil beings.
एतौ मे गावौ परमरस्य युक्तौ मो षु पर सेधीर्मुहुरिन्ममन्धि|	these my two bulls even pramaras are harnessed drive them not far here let them often linger.
आपश्चिदस्य वि नशन्त्यर्थं सूरश्च मर्कौपरो बभूवान|	the waters even shall aid him to his object and the allcleansing sun who is above us.
अयं यो वज्रः पुरुधा विव्र्त्तोअवः सूर्यस्य बर्हतःपुरीषात|	this is the thunderbolt which often whirleth down from the lofty misty realm of sūrya.
शरव इदेना परो अन्यदस्ति तदव्यथीजरिमाणस्तरन्ति|	beyond this realm there is another glory so through old age they pass and feel no sorrow.
वर्क्षेवर्क्षे नियता मीमयद गौस्ततो वयः पर पतान्पुरुषादः|	bound fast toevery tree the cow is lowing and thence the manconsuming birds are flying.
अथेदं विश्वं भुवनं भयात इद्रायसुन्वद रषये च शिक्षत|	then all this world though pressing juice for indra and strengthening the Ṛṣi is affrighted.
देवानां माने परथमा अतिष्ठन कर्न्तत्रदेषमुपर उदायन|	in the gods mansion stood the firstcreated and from their separation came the later.
तरयस्तपन्ति पर्थिविमनूप दव बर्बूकं वहतःपुरीषम|	three warm the earth while holding stores of water and two of these convey the murmuring moisture.
सा ते जीवातुरुत तस्य विद्धि म समैताद्र्गप गूहःसमर्ये|	this is thy life and do thou mark and know it as such hide not thyself in time of battle.
अविः सवः कर्णुते गूहते बुसं स पादुरस्यनिर्णिजो न मुच्यते|	he manifests the light and hides the vapour his foot is never free from robes that veil it.
कुह शरुत इन्द्रः कस्मिन्नद्य जने मित्रो न शरुयते|	where is famed indra heard of with what folk is he renowned today as mitra is.
रषीणां वा यः कषये गुहा व चर्क्र्षे गिर|	who in the home of Ṛṣis and in secret is extolled with song.
इह शरुत इन्द्रो अस्मे अद्य सतवे वज्र्य रचीषमः|	even here is indra famed and among us this day the glorious thunderer is praised.
मित्रो नयो जनेष्वा यशश्चक्रे असाम्या|	he who like mitra mid the folk hath won complete and full renown.
महो यस पतिः शवसो असाम्या महो नर्म्णस्य तूतुजिः|	he who is sovran lord of great and perfect strength exerter of heroic might.
भर्ता वज्रस्य धर्ष्णोः पिता पुत्रमिव परियम|	who bears the fearless thunder as a father bears his darling son.
युजानो अश्व वातस्य धुनी देवो देवस्य वज्रिवः|	harnessing to thy car as god two blustering steeds of the windgod o thunderer.
सयन्तपथा विरुक्मता सर्जान सतोष्यध्वनः|	that speed along the shining path thou making ways art glorified.
तवं तया चिद वातस्याश्वागा रज्रा तमना वहध्यै|	even to these dark steeds of wind thou of thyself hast come to ride.
ययोर्देवो न मर्त्यो यन्ता नकिर्विदाय्यः|	of which no driver may be found none be he god or mortal man.
अध गमन्तोशना पर्छते वां कदर्था न आ गर्हम|	when ye approach men ask you thee and uśanā why come ye to our dwellingplace.
आजग्मथुः पराकाद दिवश्च गमश्च मर्त्यम|	why are ye come to mortal man from distant realms of eapth and heaven.
आ न इन्द्र पर्क्षसेअस्माकं बरह्मोद्यतम|	o indra thou shalt speak us fair our holy prayer is offered up.
तत तवायाचामहेअवः शुष्णं यद धन्नमानुषम|	we pray to thee for help as thou didst strike the monster Śuṣṇa dead.
अकर्मा दस्युरभि नो अमन्तुरन्यव्रतो अमानुषः|	around us is the dasyu riteless void of sense inhuman keeping alien laws.
तवन्तस्यामित्रहन वधर्दासस्य दम्भय|	baffle thou slayer of the foe the weapon which this dāsa wields.
तवं न इन्द्र शूर शूरैरुत तवोतासो बर्हणा|	hero with heroes thou art ours yea strong are they whom thou dost help.
पुरुत्राते वि पूर्तयो नवन्त कषोणयो यथा|	in many a place are thy full gifts and men like vassals sing thy praise.
तवं तान वर्त्रहत्ये चोदयो नॄन कार्पाणे शूर वज्रिवः|	urge thou these heroes on to slay the enemy brave thunderer in the fight with swords.
गुहा यदी कवीनां विशां नक्षत्रशवसाम|	even when hid among the tribes of sages numerous as stars.
मक्षू ता त इन्द्र दानाप्नस आक्षाणे शूर वज्रिवः|	swift come those gifts of thine whose hand is prompt to rend and burn o hero thunderarmed.
यद ध शुष्णस्य दम्भयो जातं विश्वं सयावभिः|	as thou with thy companions didst destroy the whole of susnias brood.
माकुध्र्यगिन्द्र शूर वस्वीरस्मे भूवन्नभिष्टयः|	let not thine excellent assistance come to us o hero indra profitless.
वयंवयं त आसां सुम्ने सयाम वज्रिवः|	may we may we enjoy the bliss of these thy favours thunderer.
अस्मे ता त इन्द्र सन्तु सत्याहिंसन्तीरुपस्प्र्शः|	may those soft impulses of thine o indra be fruitful and innocent to us.
विद्यामयासां भुजो धेनूनां न वज्रिवः|	may we know these whose treasures are like those of milchkine thunderer.
अहस्ता यदपदी वर्धत कषाः शचीभिर्वेद्यानाम|	that earth through power of knowing things that may be known handless and footless yet might thrive.
शुष्णं परि परदक्षिणिद विश्वायवे नि शिश्नथः|	thou slewest turning to the right guna for every living man.
पिबापिबेदिन्द्र शूर सोमं मा रिषण्यो वसवान वसुःसन|	drink drink the soma hero indra be not withheld as thou art good o treasuregiver.
उत तरायस्व गर्णतो मघोनो महश्च रायो रेवतस्क्र्धी नः|	preserve the singers and our liberal princes and make us wealthy with abundant riches.
पर देवत्रा बराह्मणे गातुरेत्वपो अछा मनसो नप्रयुक्ति|	as twere with swift exertion of the spirit let the priest speed to the celestial waters.
महीं मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धासिं पर्थुज्रयसेरीरधा सुव्र्क्तिम|	the glorious food of varuṇa and mitra to him who spreadeth far this laud i offer.
अध्वर्यवो हविष्मन्तो हि भूताछाप इतोशतीरुशन्तः|	adhvaryus he ye ready with oblations and come with longing to the longing waters.
अव याश्चष्टे अरुणः सुपर्णस्तमास्यध्वमूर्मिमद्या सुहस्ताः|	down on which looks the purpletinted eagle pour ye that flowing wave this day defthanded.
अध्वर्यवोअप इता समुद्रमपां नपातं हविषा यजध्वम|	go to the reservoir o ye adhvaryus worship the waters child with your oblations.
स वो दददूर्मिमद्या सुपूतं तस्मै सोमं मधुमन्तंसुनोत|	a consecrated wave he now will give you so press for him the soma rich in sweetness.
यो अनिध्मो दीदयदप्स्वन्तर्यं विप्रास ईळतेध्वरेषु|	he who shines bright in floods unfed with fuel whom sages worship at their sacrifices.
अपां नपान मधुमतीरपो दा याभिरिन्द्रोवाव्र्धे वीर्याय|	give waters rich in sweets child of the waters even those which gave heroic might to indra.
याभिः सोमो मोदते हर्षते च कल्याणीभिर्युवतिभिर्नमर्यः|	those in which soma joys and is delighted as a young man with fair and pleasant damsels.
ता अध्वर्यो अपो अछा परेहि यदासिञ्चाोषधीभिः पुनीतात|	go thou unto those waters o adhvaryu and purify with herbs what thou infusest.
एवेद यूने युवतयो नमन्त यदीमुशन्नुशतीरेत्यछ|	so maidens bow before the youthful gallant who comes with love to them who yearn to meet him.
सं जानते मनसा सं चिकित्रेअध्वर्यवो धिषणापश्चदेवीः|	in heart accordant and in wish oneminded are the adhvaryus and the heavenly waters.
यो वो वर्ताभ्यो अक्र्णोदु लोकं यो वो मह्या अभिशस्तेरमुञ्चत|	he who made room for you when fast imprisoned who freed you from the mighty imprecation.
तस्मा इन्द्राय मधुमन्तमूर्मिं देवमादनम्प्र हिणोतनापः|	even to that indra send the meathrich current the wave that gratifies the gods o waters.
परास्मै हिनोत मधुमन्तमूर्मिं गर्भो यो वः सिन्धवोमध्व उत्सः|	send forth to him the meathrich wave o rivers which is your offspring and a well of sweetness.
घर्तप्र्ष्ठमीड्यमध्वरेष्वापो रेवतीःश्र्णुता हवं मे|	oilbalmed to be implored at sacrifices ye wealthy waters hear mine invocation.
तं सिन्धवो मत्सरमिन्द्रपानमूर्मिं पर हेत य उभेियर्ति|	send forth the rapturegiving wave o rivers which indra drinks which sets the twain in motion.
मदच्युतमौशानं नभोजां परि तरितन्तुंविचरन्तमुत्सम|	the well that springeth from the clouds desirous that wandereth tripleformed distilling transport.
आवर्व्र्ततीरध नु दविधारा गोषुयुधो न नियवंचरन्तीः|	these winding streams which with their double current like cattleraiders seek the lower pastures.
रषे जनित्रीर्भुवनस्य पत्नीरपो वन्दस्वसव्र्धः सयोनीः|	waters which dwell together thrive together queens mothers of the world these Ṛṣi honour.
हिनोता नो अध्वरं देवयज्या हिनोत बरह्म सनयेधनानाम|	send forth our sacrifice with holy worship send forth the hymn and prayer for gain of riches.
रतस्य योगे वि शयध्वमूधः शरुष्टीवरीर्भूतनास्मभ्यमापः|	for need of sacrifice disclose the udder give gracious hearing to our call o waters.
आपो रेवतीः कषयथा हि वस्वः करतुं च भद्रम्बिभ्र्थाम्र्तं च|	for wealthy waters ye control all treasures ye bring auspicious intellect and amṛta.
रायश्च सथ सवपत्यस्य पत्नीःसरस्वती तद गर्णते वयो धात|	ye are the queens of independent riches sarasvatī give full life to the singer.
परति यदापो अद्र्श्रमायतीर्घ्र्तं पयांसि बिभ्रतीर्मधूनि|	when i behold the waters coming hither carrying with them milk and mcath and butter.
अध्वर्युभिर्मनसा संविदाना इन्द्राय सोमंसुषुतं भरन्तीः|	bearing the wellpressed soma juice to indra they harmonize in spirit with adhvaryus.
एमा अग्मन रेवतीर्जीवधन्या अध्वर्यवः सादयतासखायः|	rich they are come with wealth for living beings o friends adhvaryus seat them in their places.
नि बर्हिषि धत्तन सोम्यासोअपां नप्त्रासंविदानास एनाः|	seat them on holy grass ye somabringers in harmony with the offspring of the waters.
आग्मन्नाप उशतीर्बर्हिरेदं नयध्वरे असदन्देवयन्तीः|	now to this grass are come the longing waters the pious ones are seated at our worship.
अध्वर्यवः सुनुतेन्द्राय सोममभूदु वःसुशका देवयज्या|	adbvaryus press the soma juice for indra so will the service of the gods be easy.
बर्हस्पते परति मे देवतामिहि मित्रो वा यद वरुणो वासिपूषा|	come be thou mitra varuṇa or pūṣan come o bṛhaspati to mine oblation.
आदित्यैर्वा यद वसुभिर्मरुत्वान स पर्जन्यंशन्तनवे वर्षाय|	with maruts vasus or Ādityas make thou parjanya pour for santanu his raindrops.
आ देवो दूतो अजिरश्चिकित्वान तवद देवापे अभि मामगछत|	the god intelligent the speedy envoy whom thou hast sent hath come to me devapi.
परतीचीनः परति मामा वव्र्त्स्व दधामि ते दयुमतींवाचमासन|	address thyself to me and turn thee hither within thy lips will i put brilliant language.
अस्मे धेहि दयुमतीं वाचमासन बर्हस्पते अनमीवामिषिराम|	within my mouth bṛhaspati deposit speech lucid vigorous and free from weakness.
यया वर्ष्टिं शन्तनवे वनाव दिवो दरप्सोमधुमाना विवेश|	thereby to win for santanu the rainfall the meathrich drop from heaven hath passed within it.
आ नो दरप्सा मधुमन्तो विशन्त्विन्द्र देह्यधिरथंसहस्रम|	let the sweet drops descend on us o indra give us enough to lade a thousand wagons.
नि षीद होत्रं रतुथा यजस्व देवान देवापेहविषा सपर्य|	sit to thy hotar task pay worship duly and serve the gods devapi with oblation.
आर्ष्टिषेणो होत्रं रषिर्निषीदन देवापिर्देवसुमतिंचिकित्वान|	knowing the gods goodwill devapi Ṛṣi the son of rstisena sate as hotar.
स उत्तरस्मादधरं समुद्रमपो दिव्या अस्र्जद्वर्ष्या अभि|	he hath brought down from heavens most lofty summit the ocean of the rain celestial waters.
अस्मिन समुद्रे अध्युत्तरस्मिन्नापो देवेभिर्निव्र्ता अतिष्ठन|	gathered together in that highest ocean the waters stood by deities obstructed.
ता अद्रवन्नार्ष्टिषेणेन सर्ष्टा देवापिना परेषिताम्र्क्षिणीषु|	they burried down set free by arstisena in gaping clefts urged onward by devapi.
यद देवापिः शन्तनवे पुरोहितो होत्राय वर्तः कर्पयन्नदीधेत|	when as chief priest for santanu devapi chosen for hotars duty prayed beseeching.
देवश्रुतं वर्ष्टिवनिं रराणो बर्हस्पतिर्वाचमस्मा अयछत|	graciously pleased bṛhaspati vouchsafed him a voice that reached the gods and won the waters.
यं तवा देवापिः शुशुचानो अग्न आर्ष्टिषेणो मनुष्यःसमीधे|	o agni whom devapi arstisena the mortal man hath kindled in his glory.
विश्वेभिर्देवैरनुमद्यमानः पर पर्जन्यमीरया वर्ष्टिमन्तम|	joying in him with all the gods together urge on the sender of the rain parjanya.
तवां पूर्व रषयो गीर्भिरायन तवामध्वरेषु पुरुहूतविश्वे|	all ancient Ṛṣis with their songs approached thee even thee o muchinvoked at sacrifices.
सहस्राण्यधिरथान्यस्मे आ नो यज्ञंरोहिदश्वोप याहि|	we have provided wagonloads in thousands come to the solemn rite lord of red horses.
एतान्यग्ने नवतिर्नव तवे आहुतान्यधिरथा सहस्र|	the wagonloads the nineandninety thousand these have been offered up to thee o agni.
तेभिर्वर्धस्व तन्वः शूर पूर्वीर्दिवो नो वर्ष्टिमिषितोरिरीहि|	hero with these increase thy many bodies and stimulated send us rain from heaven.
एतान्यग्ने नवतिं सहस्रा सं पर यछ वर्ष्ण इन्द्रायभागम|	give thou these ninety thousand loads o agni to indra to the bull to be his portion.
विद्वान पथ रतुशो देवयानानप्यौलानं दिविदेवेषु धेहि|	knowing the paths which deities duly travel set mid the gods in heaven aulana also.
अग्ने बाधस्व वि मर्धो वि दुर्गहापामीवामपरक्षांसि सेध|	o agni drive afar our foes our troubles chase malady away and wicked demons.
अस्मात समुद्राद बर्हतो दिवो नोअपाम्भूमानमुप नः सर्जेह|	from this airocean from the lofty heavens send down on us a mighty flood of waters.
आ याहि वनसा सह गावः सचन्त वर्तनिं यदूधभिः|	with all thy beauty come the kine approaching with full udders follow on thy path.
आ याहि वस्व्या धिया मंहिष्ठो जारयन्मखःसुदानुभिः|	come with kind thoughts most liberal rousing the warriors hymn of praise with bounteous ones.
पितुभ्र्तो न तन्तुमित सुदानवः परति दध्मो यजामसि|	as nourishers we tie the thread and liberal with our bounty offer sacrifice.
उषा अप सवसुस्तमः सं वर्तयति वर्तनिं सुजातता|	dawn drives away her sisters gloom and through her excellence makes her retrace her path.
आशुः शिशानो वर्षभो न भीमो घनाघनः कषोभणश्चर्षणीनाम|	swift rapidly striking like a bull who sharpens his horns terrific stirring up the people.
संक्रन्दनोअनिमिष एकवीरः शतं सेनाजयत साकमिन्द्रः|	with eyes that close not bellowing sole hero indra subdued at once a hundred armies.
संक्रन्दनेनानिमिषेण जिष्णुना युत्कारेण दुश्च्यवनेनध्र्ष्णुना|	with him loudroaring ever watchful victor bold hard to overthrow rouser of battle.
तदिन्द्रेण जयत तत सहध्वं युधो नरैषुहस्तेन वर्ष्णा|	indra the strong whose hand bears arrows conquer ye warriors now now vanquish in the combat.
स इषुहस्तैः स निषङगिभिर्वशी संस्रष्टा स युधैन्द्रो गणेन|	he rules with those who carry shafts and quivers indra who with his band rings hosts together.
संस्र्ष्टजित सोमपा बाहुशर्ध्युग्रधन्वाप्रतिहिताभिरस्ता|	foeconquering strong of arm the somadrinker with mighty bow shooting with welllaid arrows.
बर्हस्पते परि दीया रथेन रक्षोहामित्रानपबाधमानः|	bṛhaspati fly with thy chariot hither slayer of demons driving off our foemen.
परभञ्जन सेनाः परम्र्णो युधा जयन्नस्माकमेध्यविता रथानाम|	be thou protector of our cars destroyer victor in battle breakerup of armies.
बलविज्ञाय सथविरः परवीरः सहस्वान वाजी सहमानौग्रः|	conspicuous by thy strength firm foremost fighter mighty and fierce victorious allsubduing.
अभिवीरो अभिसत्वा सहोजा जैत्रमिन्द्र रथमातिष्ठ गोवित|	the son of conquest passing men and heroes kinewinner mount thy conquering car o indra.
गोत्रभिदं गोविदं वज्रबाहुं जयन्तमज्म परम्र्णन्तमोजसा|	cleaver of stalls kinewinner armed with thunder who quells an army and with might destroys it.
इमं सजाता अनु वीरयध्वमिन्द्रं सखायो अनुसं रभध्वम|	follow him brothers quit yourselves like heroes and like this indra show your zeal and courage.
अभि गोत्राणि सहसा गाहमानोअदयो वीरः शतमन्युरिन्द्रः|	piercing the cowstalls with surpassing vigour indra the pitiless hero wild with anger.
दुश्च्यवनः पर्तनाषाळ अयुध्योअस्माकं सेनावतु पर युत्सु|	victor in fight unshaken and resistlessmay he protect our armies in our battles.
इन्द्र आसां नेता बर्हस्पतिर्दक्षिणा यज्ञः पुर एतुसोमः|	indra guide these bṛhaspati precede them the guerdon and the sacrifice and soma.
देवसेनानामभिभञ्जतीनां जयन्तीनां मरुतोयन्त्वग्रम|	and let the banded maruts march in forefront of heavenly hosts that conquer and demolish.
इन्द्रस्य वर्ष्णो वरुणस्य राज्ञ आदित्यानां मरुतांशर्ध उग्रम|	ours be the potent host of mighty indra king varuṇa and maruts and Ādityas.
महामनसां भुवनच्यवानां घोषोदेवानां जयतामुदस्थात|	uplifted is the shout of gods who conquer highminded gods who cause the worlds to tremble.
उद धर्षय मघवन्नायुधान्युत सत्वनां मामकानाम्मनांसि|	bristle thou up o maghavan our weapons excite the spirits of my warring heroes.
उद वर्त्रहन वाजिनां वाजिनान्युद रथानांजयतां यन्तु घोषाः|	urge on the strong steeds might o vṛtraslayer and let the din of conquering cars go upward.
अस्माकमिन्द्रः सम्र्तेषु धवजेष्वस्माकं या इषवस्ताजयन्तु|	may indra aid us when our flags are gathered victorious be the arrows of our army.
अस्माकं वीरा उत्तरे भवन्त्वस्मानु देवा अवताहवेषु|	may our brave men of war prevail in battle ye gods protect us in the shout of onset.
अमीषां चित्तं परतिलोभयन्ती गर्हाणाङगान्यप्वे परेहि|	bewildering the senses of our foemen seize thou their bodies and depart o apva.
अभि परेहि निर्दह हर्त्सु शोकैरन्धेनामित्रास्तमसासचन्ताम|	attack them set their hearts on fire and burn them so let our foes abide in utter darkness.
परेता जयता नर इन्द्रो वः शर्म यछतु|	advance o heroes win the day may indra be your sure defence.
उग्रा वः सन्तुबाहवोअनाध्र्ष्या यथासथ|	exceeding mighty be your arms that none may wound or injure you.
परो षवस्मै पुरोरथमिन्द्राय शूषमर्चत|	sing strength to indra that shall set his chariot in the foremost place.
अभीके चिदुलोकक्र्त संगे समत्सु वर्त्रहास्माकं बोधि चोदितानभन्तामन्यकेषां जयाका अधि धन्वसु|	giver of room in closest fight slayer of foes in shock of war be thou our great encourager let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of feeble enemies.
तवं सिन्धून्रवास्र्जोअधराचो अहन्नहिम|	thou didst destroy the dragon thou sentest the rivers down to earth.
अशत्रुरिन्द्रजज्ञिषे विश्वं पुष्यसि वार्यं तं तवा परि षवजामहेनभन्तामन्यकेषां जयाका अधि धन्वसु|	foeless o indra wast thou born thou tendest well each choicest thing therefore we draw us close to thee let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of feeble enemies.
वि षु विश्वा अरातयोअर्यो नशन्त नो धियः|	destroyed be all malignities and all our enemys designs.
अस्तासिशत्रवे वधं यो न इन्द्र जिघांसति या ते रातिर्ददिर्वसु नभन्तामन्यकेषां जयाका अधि धन्वसु|	thy bolt thou castest at the foe o indra who would srnite us dead thy liberal bounty gives us wealth.
यो न इन्द्राभितो जनो वर्कायुरादिदेशति|	the robber people round about indra who watch and aim at us.
अधस्पदं तमीं कर्धि विबाधो असि सासहिर्नभन्तामन्यकेषां जयाकाधि धन्वसु|	trample them down beneath thy foot a conquering scatterer art thou.
यो न इन्द्राभिदासति सनाभिर्यश्च निष्ट्यः|	whoso assails us indra be the man a stranger or akin.
अव तस्यबलं तिर महीव दयौरध तमना नभन्तामन्यकेषांज्याका अधि धन्वसु|	bring down thyself his strength although it be as vast as are the heavens.
वयमिन्द्र तवायवः सखित्वमा रभामहे|	close to thy friendship do we cling o indra and depend or thee.
रतस्य नःपथा नयाति विश्वानि दुरिता नभन्तामन्यकेषांज्याका अधि धन्वसु|	lead us beyond all pain and grief along the path of holy law.
अस्मभ्यं सु तवमिन्द्र तां शिक्ष या दोहते परति वरंजरित्रे|	do thou bestow upon us her o indra who yields according to the singers longing.
अछिद्रोध्नी पीपयद यथा नः सहस्रधारापयसा मही गौः|	that the great cow may with exhaustless udder pouring a thousand streams give milk to feed us.
तमस्य दयावाप्र्थिवी सचेतसा विश्वेभिर्देवैरनुशुष्ममावताम|	the heavens and the earth accordant with all gods encouraged graciously that vigorous might of his.
यदैत कर्ण्वानो महिमानमिन्द्रियम्पीत्वी सोमस्य करतुमानवर्धत|	when he came showing forth his majesty and power he drank of soma juice and waxed exceeding strong.
तमस्य विष्णुर्महिमानमोजसांशुं दधन्वान मधुनोवि रप्शते|	this majesty of his viṣṇu extols and lauds making the stalcthat gives the meath flow forth with inight.
देवेभिरिन्द्रो मघवा सयावभिर्व्र्त्रंजघन्वानभवद वरेण्यः|	when indra maghavan with those who followed him had smitten vṛtra he deserved the choice of gods.
वर्त्रेण यदहिना बिभ्रदायुधा समस्थिथा युधयेशंसमाविदे|	when bearing warlike weapons fain to win thee praise thou mettest vṛtra yea the dragon for the fight.
विश्वे ते अत्र मरुतः सह तमनावर्धन्नुग्र महिमानमिन्द्रियम|	then all the maruts who were gathered with dice there extolled o mighty one thy powerful majesty.
जज्ञान एव वयबाधत सप्र्धः परापश्यद वीरो अभिपौंस्यं रणम|	soon as he sprang to life he forced asun der hosts forward the hero looked to manly deed and war.
अव्र्श्चदद्रिमव सस्यदः सर्जदस्तभ्नान नाकं सवपस्यया पर्थुम|	he cleft the rock he let concurrent streams flow forth and with his skilful art stablished the heavens wide vault.
आदिन्द्रः सत्रा तविषीरपत्यत वरीयो दयावाप्र्थिवीबाधत|	indra hath evermore possessed surpassing power he forced far from each other heaven and earth apart.
अवाभरद धर्षितो वज्रमायसं शेवं मित्रायवरुणाय दाशुषे|	he hurled impetuous down his iron thunderbolt a joy to varuṇas and mitras worshipper.
इन्द्रस्यात्र तविषीभ्यो विरप्शिन रघायतो अरंहयन्तमन्यवे|	then to the mighty powers of indra to his wrath his the fierce stormer loud of voice they came with speed.
वर्त्रं यदुग्रो वयव्र्श्चदोजसापो बिभ्रतन्तमसा परीव्र्तम|	what time the potent one rent vṛtra with his strength who held the waters back whom darkness compassed round.
या वीर्याणि परथमानि कर्त्वा महित्वेभिर्यतमानौसमीयतुः|	even in the first of those heroic acts which they who strove together came with might to execute.
धवान्तं तमोअव दध्वसे हत इन्द्रो मह्नापूर्वहूतावपत्यत|	deep darkness fell upon the slain and indra won by victory the right of being first invoked.
विश्वे देवासो अध वर्ष्ण्यानि तेअवर्धयन सोमवत्यावचस्यया|	then all the gods extolled with eloquence inspired by draughts of soma juice thy deeds of manly might.
रद्धं वर्त्रमहिमिन्द्रस्य हन्मनाग्निर्नजम्भैस्त्र्ष्वन्नमावयत|	as agni eats the dry food with his tcetlv he ate vṛtra the dragon maimed by indras deadly dart.
भूरि दक्षेभिर्वचनेभिरकवभिः सख्येभिः सख्यानिप्र वोचत|	proclaim his many friendships met with friendship made with singers with the skilful and the eloquent.
इन्द्रो धुनिं च चुमुरिं च दम्भयञ्छ्रद्धामनस्या शर्णुते दभीतये|	indra when he subdues dhuni and cumuri lists to dabhīti for his faithful spirits sake.
तवं पुरूण्या भरा सवश्व्या येभिर्मंसै निवचनानिशंसन|	give riches manifold with noble horses to be remembered while my songs address thee.
सुगेभिर्विश्वा दुरिता तरेम विदो षु ण उर्वियागाधमद्य|	may we by easy paths pass all our troubles find us this day a ford wide and extensive.
रथं यान्तं कुह को ह वां नरा परति दयुमन्तंसुविताय भूषति|	your radiant chariotwhither goes it on its waywho decks it for you heroes for its happy course.
परातर्यावाणं विभ्वं विशेविशेवस्तोर वस्तोर्वहमानं धिया शमि|	starting at daybreak visiting each morning every house borne hitherward through prayer unto the sacrifice.
कुह सविद दोषा कुह वस्तोरश्विना कुहाभिपित्वं करतःकुहोषतुः|	where are ye aśvins in the evening where at morn where is your haltingplace where rest ye for the night.
को वां शयुत्रा विधवेव देवरं मर्यं नयोषा कर्णुते सधस्थ आ|	who brings you homeward as the widow bedward draws her husbands brother as the bride attracts the groom.
परातर्जरेथे जरणेव कापया वस्तोरवस्तोर्यजता गछथोग्र्हम|	early ye sing forth praise as with a heralds voice and meet for worship go each morning to the house.
कस्य धवस्रा भवथः कस्य वा नरा राजपुत्रेवसवनाव गछथः|	whom do ye ever bring to ruin unto whose libations come ye heroes like two sons of kings.
युवां मर्गेव वारणा मर्गण्यवो दोषा वस्तोर्हविषा निह्वयामहे|	even as hunters follow two wild elephants we with oblations call you down at morn and eve.
युवं होत्रां रतुथा जुह्वते नरेषं जनायवहथः शुभस पती|	to folk who pay you offierings at appointed times chiefs lords of splendour ye bring food to strengthen them.
युवां ह घोषा पर्यश्विना यती राज्ञ ऊचे दुहिताप्र्छे वां नरा|	to you o aśvins came the daughter of a king ghoṣā and said o heroes this i beg of you.
भूतं मे अह्न उत भूतमक्तवेऽशवावते रथिने शक्तमर्वते|	be near me in the day he near me in the night help me to gain a carborne chieftain rich in steeds.
युवं कवी षठः पर्यश्विना रथं विशो न कुत्सोजरितुर्नशायथः|	o aśvins ye are wise as kutsa comes to men bring your car nigh the folk of him who sings your praise.
युवोर्ह मक्षा पर्यश्विना मध्वासा भरत निष्क्र्तं न योषणा|	the bee o aśvins bears your honey in her mouth as the maid carries it purified in her hand.
युवं ह भुज्युं युवमश्विना वशं युवं शिञ्जारमुशनामुपारथुः|	to bhujyu and to vaśa ye come near with help o aśvins to sinjara and to uśanā.
युवो ररावा परि सख्यमासते युवोरहमवसा सुम्नमा चके|	your worshipper secures your friendship for himself through your protection i desire felicity.
युवं ह कर्शं युवमश्विना शयुं युवं विधन्तंविधवामुरुष्यथः|	krsa and Śayu ye protect ye aśvins twain ye two assist the widow and the worshipper.
युवं सनिभ्य सतनयन्तमश्विनापव्रजमूर्णुथः सप्तास्यम|	and ye throw open aśvins unto those who win the cattlestall that thunders with its serenfold mouth.
जनिष्ट योषा पतयत कनीनको वि चारुहन वीरुधोदंसना अनु|	the woman hath brought forth the infant hath appeared the plants of wondrous beauty straightway have sprung up.
आस्मै रीयन्ते निवनेव सिन्धवोअस्मा अह्नेभवति तत पतित्वनम|	to him the rivers run as down a deep descent and he this day becomes their master and their lord.
जीवं रुदन्ति वि मयन्ते अध्वरे दीर्घामनु परसितिन्दीधियुर्नरः|	they mourn the living cry aloud at sacrifice the men have set their thoughts upon a distant cast.
वामं पित्र्भ्यो य इदं समेरिरे मयःपतिभ्यो जनयः परिष्वजे|	a lovely thing for fathers who have gathered herea joy to husbandsare the wives their arms shall clasp.
न तस्य विद्म तदु षु पर वोचत युवा ह यद युवत्याःक्षेति योनिषु|	of this we have no knowledge tall it forth to us now the youth rests within the chambers of the bride.
परियोस्रियस्य वर्षभस्य रेतिनो गर्हंगमेमाश्विना तदुश्मसि|	fain would we reach the dwelling of the vigorous steer who loves the kine o aśvins this is our desire.
आ वामगन सुमतिर्वाजिनीवसू नयश्विना हर्त्सु कामायंसत|	your favouring grace hath come ye lords of ample wealth aśvins our longings are stored up within your hearts.
अभूतं गोपा मिथुना शुभस पती परियार्यम्णो दुर्यानशीमहि|	ye lords of splendour have become our twofold guard may we as welcome friends reach aryamans abode.
ता मन्दसाना मनुषो दुरोण आ धत्तं रयिं सहवीरंवचस्यवे|	even so rejoicing in the dwellingplace of man give hero sons and riches to the eloquent.
कर्तं तीर्थं सुप्रपाणं शुभस पतीस्थाणुं पथेष्ठामप दुर्मतिं हतम|	make a ford lords of splendour where men well may drink remove the spiteful treestump standing in the path.
कव सविदद्य कतमास्वश्विना विक्षु दस्रा मादयेतेशुभस पती|	o aśvins wonderworkers lords of lustre where and with what folk do ye delight yourselves today.
क ईं नि येमे कतमस्य जग्मतुर्विप्रस्य वायजमानस्य वा गर्हम|	who hath detained them with him whither are they gone unto what sages or what worshippers abode.
परं मर्त्यो अनु परेहि पन्थां यस्ते सव इतरो देवयानात|	go hence o death pursue thy special pathway apart from that which gods are wont to travel.
चक्षुष्मते शर्ण्वते ते बरवीमि मा नः परजां रीरिषोमोत वीरान|	to thee i say it who hast eyes and hearest touch not our offspring injure not our heroes.
मर्त्योः पदं योपयन्तो यदैत दराघीय आयुः परतरन्दधानाः|	as ye have come effacing mrtyus footstep to further times prolonging your existence.
आप्यायमानाः परजया धनेन शुद्धाःपूता भवत यज्ञियासः|	may ye be rich in children and possessions cleansed purified and meet for sacrificing.
इमे जीवा वि मर्तैरावव्र्त्रन्नभूद भद्रा देवहूतिर्नोद्य|	divided from the dead are these the living now be our calling on the gods successful.
पराञ्चो अगाम नर्तये हसाय दराघीय आयुःप्रतरं दधानाः|	we have gone forth for dancing and for laughter tofurther times prolonging our existence.
इमं जीवेभ्यः परिधिं दधामि मैषां नु गादपरोर्थमेतम|	here i erect this rampart for the living let none of these none other reach this limit.
शतं जीवन्तु शरदः पुरूचीरन्तर्म्र्त्युं दधतां पर्वतेन|	may they survive a hundred lengthened autumns and may they bury death beneath this mountain.
यथाहान्यनुपूर्वं भवन्ति यथ रतव रतुभिर्यन्तिसाधु|	as the days follow days in close succession as with the seasons duly come the seasons.
यथा न पूर्वमपरो जहात्येवा धातरायूंषि कल्पयैषाम|	as each successor fails not his foregoer so form the lives of these o great ordainer.
आ रोहतायुर्जरसं वर्णाना अनुपूर्वं यतमाना यतिष्ठ|	live your full lives ap find old age delightful all of you striving one behind the other.
इह तवष्टा सुजनिमा सजोषा दीर्घमायुःकरति जीवसे वः|	may tvaṣṭar maker of fair things be gracious and lengthen out the days of your existence.
इमा नारीरविधवाः सुपत्नीराञ्जनेन सर्पिषा संविशन्तु|	let these unwidowed dames with noble husbands adorn themselves with fragrant balm and unguent.
अनश्रवोअनमीवाः सुरत्ना आ रोहन्तु जनयोयोनिमग्रे|	decked with fair jewels tearless free from sorrow first let the dames go up to where he lieth.
उदीर्ष्व नार्यभि जीवलोकं गतासुमेतमुप शेष एहि|	rise come unto the world of life o woman come he is lifeless by whose side thou liest.
हस्तग्राभस्य दिधिषोस्तवेदं पत्युर्जनित्वमभि सम्बभूथ|	wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion who took thy hand and wooed thee as a lover.
धनुर्हस्तादाददानो मर्तस्यास्मे कषत्राय वर्चसेबलाय|	from his dead hand i take the bow be carried that it may be our power and might and glory.
अत्रैव तवमिह वयं सुवीरा विश्वा सप्र्धोभिमातीर्जयेम|	there art thou there and here with noble heroes may we oercome all hosts that fight against us.
उप सर्प मातरं भूमिमेतामुरुव्यचसं पर्थिवींसुशेवाम|	betake thee to the iap of earth the mother of earth farspreading very kind and gracious.
ऊर्णम्रदा युवतिर्दक्षिणावत एषा तवा पातुनिरतेरुपस्थात|	young dame woolsoft unto the guerdongiver may she preserve thee from destructions bosom.
उच्छ्वञ्चस्व पर्थिवि मा नि बाधथाः सूपायनास्मै भवसूपवञ्चना|	heave thyself earth nor press thee downward heavily afford him easy access gently tending him.
माता पुत्रं यथा सिचाभ्येनं भूमूर्णुहि|	cover him as a mother wraps her skirt about her child o earth.
उच्छ्वञ्चमाना पर्थिवी सु तिष्ठतु सहस्रं मित उप हिश्रयन्ताम|	now let the heaving earth be free from motion yealet a thousand clods remain above him.
ते गर्हासो घर्तश्चुतो भवन्तु विश्वाहास्मैशरणाः सन्त्वत्र|	be they to him a home distilling fatness here let them ever be his place of refuge.
उत ते सतभ्नामि पर्थिवीं तवत परीमं लोगं निदधन मोहं रिषम|	i stay the earth from thee while over thee i place this piece of earth may i be free from injury.
एतां सथूणां पितरो धारयन्तु तेअत्रायमः सादना ते मिनोतु|	here let the fathers keep this pillar firm for thee and there let yama make thee an abidingplace.
परतीचीने मामहनीष्वाः पर्णमिवा दधुः|	even as an arrows feathers they have set me on a fitting day.
परतीचीं जग्रभा वाचमश्वं रशनया यथा|	the fit word have i caught and held as twere a courser with the rein.
चक्षुषः पिता मनसा हि धीरो घर्तमेने अजनन्नन्नमाने|	the father of the eye the wise in spirit created both these worlds submerged in fatness.
यदेदन्ता अदद्र्हन्त पूर्व आदिद्द्यावाप्र्थिवी अप्रथेताम|	then when the eastern ends were firmly fastened the heavens and the earth were far extended.
विश्वकर्मा विमना आद विहाया धाता विधाता परमोतसन्द्र्क|	mighty in mind and power is visvakarman maker disposer and most lofty presence.
तेषामिष्टानि समिषा मदन्ति यत्रासप्तर्षीन पर एकमाहुः|	their offerings joy in rich juice where they value one only one beyond the seven Ṛṣis.
यो नः पिता जनिता यो विधाता धामानि वेद भुवनानिविश्वा|	father who made us he who as disposer knoweth all races and all things existing.
यो देवानां नामधा एक एव तं सम्प्रश्नम्भुवना यन्त्यन्या|	even he alone the deities narnegiverhim other beings seek for information.
त आयजन्त दरविणं समस्मा रषयः पूर्वे जरितारो नभूना|	to him in sacrifice they offered treasuresṚṣis of old in numerous troops as singers.
असूर्ते सूर्ते रजसि निषत्ते ये भूतानिसमक्र्ण्वन्निमानि|	who in the distant near and lower region made ready all these things that have existence.
परो दिवा पर एना पर्थिव्या परो देवेभिरसुरैर्यदस्ति|	that which is earlier than this earth and heaven before the asuras and gods had being.
कं सविद गर्भं परथमं दध्र आपो यत्र देवाःसमपश्यन्त विश्वे|	what was the germ primeval which the waters received where all the gods were seen together.
तमिद गर्भं परथमं दध्र आपो यत्र देवाःसमगछन्त विश्वे|	the waters they received that germ primeval wherein the gods were gathefed all together.
अजस्य नाभावध्येकमर्पितंयस्मिन विश्वानि भुवनानि तस्थुः|	it rested set upon the unborns navel that one wherein abide all things existing.
न तं विदाथ य इमा जजानायद युष्माकमन्तरम्बभूव|	ye will not find him who produced these creatures another thing hath risen up among you.
नीहारेण पराव्र्ता जल्प्या चासुत्र्प उक्थशासश्चरन्ति|	enwrapt in misty cloud with lips that stammer hymnchanters wander and are discontented.
इदं त एकं पर ऊ त एकं तर्तीयेन जयोतिषा संविशस्व|	here is one light for thee another yonder enter the third and he therewith united.
संवेशने तन्वश्चारुरेधि परियो देवानाम्परमे जनित्रे|	uniting with a body be thou welcome dear to the gods in their sublimest birthplace.
तनूष टे वाजिन तन्वं नयन्ती वाममस्मभ्यं धातुशर्म तुभ्यम|	bearing thy body vajin may thy body afford us blessing and thyself protection.
अह्रुतो महो धरुणाय देवान दिवीवज्योतिः सवमा मिमीयाः|	unswerving stablish as it were in heaven thine own light as the mighty gods supporter.
वाज्यसि वाजिनेना सुवेनीः सुवित सतोमं सुवितो दिवंगाः|	strong steed art thou go to the yearning maidens with vigour happily go to heaven and praises.
सुवितो धर्म परथमानु सत्या सुवितो देवान सुवितोऽनु पत्म|	fly happily to the gods with easy passage according to the first and faithful statutes.
महिम्न एषां पितरश्चनेशिरे देवा देवेष्वदधुरपिक्रतुम|	part of their grandeur have the fathers also gained the gods have seated mental power in them as gods.
समविव्यचुरुत यान्यत्विषुरैषां तनूषु निविविशुः पुनः|	they have embraced within themselves all energies which issuing forth again into their bodies pass.
सहोभिर्विश्वं परि चक्रमू रजः पूर्वा धामान्यमितामिमानाः|	they strode through all the region with victorious might establishing the old immeasurable laws.
तनूषु विश्वा भुवना नि येमिरे परासारयन्तपुरुध परजा अनु|	they compassed in their bodies all existing things and streamed forth offipring in many successive forms.
दविधा सूनवोअसुरं सवर्विदमास्थापयन्त तर्तीयेनकर्मणा|	in two ways have the sons established in his place the asura who finds the light by the third act.
सवां परजां पितरः पित्र्यं सह आवरेष्वदधुस्तन्तुमाततम|	as fathers they have set their heritage on earth their offspring as a thread continuously spun out.
नावा न कषोदः परदिशः पर्थिव्याः सवस्तिभिरतिदुर्गाणि विश्वा|	as in a ship through billows so through regions of air with blessings through toils and troubles.
सवां परजां बर्हदुक्थो महित्वावरेष्वदधादा परेषु|	hath bṛhaduktha brought his seed with glory and placed it here and in the realms beyond us.
आ व रञ्जस ऊर्जां वयुष्टिष्विन्द्रं मरुतो रोदसीनक्तन|	i grasp at you when power and strength begin to dawn bedew ye indra and the maruts heaven and earth.
उभे यथा नो अहनी सचाभुवा सदःसदोवरिवस्यात उद्भिदा|	that day and night in every hall of sacrifice may wait on us and bless us when they first spring forth.
तदु शरेष्ठं सवनं सुनोतनातयो न हस्तयतो अद्रिःसोतरि|	press the libation out most excellent of all the pressingstone is grasped like a handguided steed.
विदद धयर्यो अभिभूति पौंस्यं महो राये चित्तरुते यदर्वतः|	so let it win the valour that subdues the foe and the fleet coursers might that speeds to ample wealth.
तदिद धयस्य सवनं विवेरपो यथा पुरा मनवेगातुमश्रेत|	juice that this stone pours out removes defect of ours as in old time it brought prosperity to man.
गोर्णसि तवाष्ट्रे अश्वनिर्णिजि परेमध्वरेष्वध्वरानशिश्रयुः|	at sacrifices they established holy rites on tvaṣṭars milkblent juice bright with the hue of steeds.
अप हत रक्षसो भङगुरावत सकभायत निरतिंसेधतामतिम|	drive ye the treacherous demons far away from us keep nirrti afar and banish penury.
आ नो रयिं सर्ववीरं सुनोतन देवाव्यम्भरत शलोकमद्रयः|	pour riches forth for us with troops of hero sons and bear ye up o stones the song that visits gods.
दिवश्चिदा वोअमवत्तरेभ्यो विभ्वना चिदाश्वपस्तरेभ्यः|	to you who are more mighty than the heavens themselves who finishing your task with more than vibhvans speed.
वायोश्चिद सोमरभस्तरेभ्योअग्नेश्चिदर्चपितुक्र्त्तरेभ्यः|	more rapidly than vāyu seize the soma juice better than agni give us food to you i sing.
भुरन्तु नो यशसः सोत्वन्धसो गरावाणो वाचा दिवितादिवित्मता|	stirred be the glorious stones let it press out the juice the stone with heavenly song that reaches up to heaven.
नरो यत्र दुहते काम्यं मध्वाघोषयन्तोभितो मिथस्तुरः|	there where the men draw forth the meath for which they long sending their voice around in rivalry of speed.
सुन्वन्ति सोमं रथिरासो अद्रयो निरस्य रसं गविषोदुहन्ति ते|	the stones press out the soma swift as carborne men and eager for the spoil drain forth the sap thereof.
दुहन्त्यूधरुपसेचनाय कं नरो हव्य नामर्जयन्त आसभिः|	to fill the beaker they exhaust the udders store as the men purify oblations with their lips.
एते नरः सवपसो अभूतन य इन्द्राय सुनुथ सोममद्रयः|	ye present men have been most skilful in your work even ye o stones who pressed soma for indras drink.
वामंवामं वो दिव्याय धाम्ने वसुवसु वः पार्थिवयसुन्वते|	may all ye have of fair go to the heavenly race and all your treasure to the earthly worshipper.
इन्द्र पिब परतिकामं सुतस्य परातःसावस्तव हिपूर्वपीतिः|	drink of the juice o indra at thy plea sure for thy first draught is early morns libation.
हर्षस्व हन्तवे शूर शत्रूनुक्थेभिष टेवीर्या पर बरवाम|	rejoice that thou mayst slay our foes o hero and we with lauds will tell thy mighty exploits.
यस्ते रथो मनसो जवीयानेन्द्र तेन सोमपेयाय याहि|	thou hast a car more swift than thought o indra thercon come hither come to drink the soma.
तूयमा ते हरयः पर दरवन्तु येभिर्यासि वर्षभिर्मन्दमानः|	let thy bay steeds thy stallions hasten hither with whom thou cornest nigh and art delighted.
हरित्वता वर्चसा सूर्यस्य शरेष्ठै रूपैस्तन्वंस्पर्शयस्व|	deck out thy body with the fairest colours with golden splendour of the sun adorn it.
अस्माभिरिन्द्र सखिभिर्हुवानः सध्रीचीनोमादयस्वा निषद्य|	o indra turn thee hitherward invited by us thy friends be seated and be joyful.
यस्य तयत ते महिमानं मदेष्विमे मही रोदसीनाविविक्ताम|	o thou whose grandeur in thy festive transports not even these two great worlds have comprehended.
तदोक आ हरिभिरिन्द्र युक्तैः परियेभिर्याहि परियमन्नमछ|	come indra with thy dear bay horses harnessed come to our dwelling and the food thou lovest.
यस्य शश्वत पपिवानिन्द्र शत्रूननानुक्र्त्या रण्याचकर्थ|	pressed for thy joyous banquet is the soma soma whereof thou indra ever drinking.
स ते पुरन्धिं तविषीमियर्ति स ते मदायसुत इन्द्र सोमः|	hast waged unequalled battles with thy foemen which prompts the mighty flow of thine abundance.
इदं ते पात्रं सनवित्तमिन्द्र पिबा सोममेना शतक्रतो|	found from of old is this thy cup o indra Śatakratu drink therefrom the soma.
पूर्ण आहावो मदिरस्य मध्वो यं विश्व इदभिहर्यन्तिदेवाः|	filled is the beaker with the meath that gladdens the beaker which all deities delight in.
वि हि तवामिन्द्र पुरुधा जनासो हितप्रयसो वर्षभह्वयन्ते|	from many a side with proffered entertainment the folk are calling thee o mighty indra.
अस्माकं ते मधुमत्तमानीमा भुवन सवना तेषुहर्य|	these our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet meath dvink thereof and find them pleasant.
पर त इन्द्र पूर्व्याणि पर नूनं वीर्या वोचं परथमाक्र्तानि|	i will declare thy deeds of old o indra the mighty acts which thou hast first accomplished.
सतीनमन्युरश्रथायो अद्रिं सुवेदनामक्र्णोर्ब्रह्मणे गाम|	in genuine wrath thou loosenedst the mountain so that the brahman easily found the cattle.
नि षु सीद गणपते गणेषु तवामाहुर्विप्रतमंकवीनाम|	lord of the hosts amid our bands be seated they call thee greatest sage among the sages.
न रते तवत करियते किं चनारे महामर्कंमघवञ्चित्रमर्च|	nothing is done even far away without thee great wondrous maghavan is the hymn i sing thee.
अभिख्या नो मघवन नाधमानान सखे बोधि वसुपतेसखीनाम|	aim of our eyes be thou for we implore thee o maghavan friend of friends and lord of treasures.
रणं कर्धि रणक्र्त सत्यशुष्माभक्ते चिदाभजा राये अस्मान|	fight warrior strong in truth fight thou the battle give us our share of undivided riches.
शास इत्था महानस्यमित्रखादो अद्भुतः|	a mighty governor art thou wondrous destroyer of the foe.
न यस्यहन्यते सखा न जीयते कदा चन|	whose friend is never done to death and never never overcome.
सवस्तिद विशस पतिर्व्र्त्रहा विम्र्धो वशी|	lord of the clan who brings us bliss strong warrior slayer of the fiend.
वर्षेन्द्रःपुर एतु नः सोमप अभयंकरः|	may india somadrinker go before us bull who gives us peace.
वि रक्षो वि मर्धो जहि वि वर्त्रस्य हनू रुज|	drive rākṣasas and foes away break thou in pieces vṛtrasjaws.
वि मन्युमिन्द्र वर्त्रहन्नमित्रस्याभिदसतः|	o vṛtraslaying indra quell the foemans wrath who threatens us.
वि न इन्द्र मर्धो जहि नीचा यछ पर्तन्यतः|	o indra beat our foes away humble the men who challenge us.
यो अस्मानभिदासत्यधरं गमया तमः|	send down to nether darkness him who seeks to do us injury.
अपेन्द्र दविषतो मनोअप जिज्यासतो वधम|	baffle the foemans plan ward off his weapon who would conquer us.
वि मन्योःशर्म यछ वरीयो यवया वधम|	give shelter from his furious wrath and keep his murdering dart afar.
सं जाग्र्वद्भिर्जरमाण इध्यते दमे दमूना इषयन्निळस पदे|	brisk at the place of iḷā hymned by men who wake our own familiar friend is kindled in the house.
विश्वस्य होता हविषो वरेण्यो विभुर्विभावासुषखा सखीयते|	hotar of all oblation worthy of our choice lord beaming trusty friend to one who loveth him.
स दर्शतश्रीरतिथिर्ग्र्हेगर्हे वनेवने शिश्रियेतक्ववीरिव|	he excellent in glory guest in every house finds like a swiftwinged bird a home in every tree.
जनंजनं जन्यो नाति मन्यते विश आक्षेति विश्यो विशं विशम|	benevolent to men he scorns no living man friend to the tribes of men he dwells with every tribe.
सुदक्षो दक्षैः करतुनासि सुक्रतुरग्ने कविः काव्येनासिविश्ववित|	most sage with insight passing skilful with thy powers art thou o agni wise with wisdom knowing all.
वसुर्वसूनां कषयसि तवमेक इद दयावा चयानि पर्थिवी च पुष्यतः|	as vasu thou alone art lord of all good things of all the treasures that the heavens and earth produce.
परजानन्नग्ने तव योनिं रत्वियमिळायास पदे घर्तवन्तमासदः|	foreknowing well o agni thou in iḷās place hast occupied thy regular station balmed with oil.
आ ते चिकित्र उषसामिवेतयोअरेपसः सूर्यस्येवरश्मयः|	marked are thy comings like the comings of the dawns the rays of him who shineth spotless as the sun.
तव शरियो वर्ष्यस्येव विद्युतश्चित्राश्चिकित्र उषसांन केतवः|	thy glories are as lightnings from the rainy cloud marked manyhued like heralds of the dawns approach.
यदोषधीरभिस्र्ष्टो वनानि च परिस्वयं चिनुषे अन्नमास्ये|	when loosed to wander over plants and forest trees thou crammest by thyself thy food into thy mouth.
तमोषधीर्दधिरे गर्भं रत्वियं तमापो अग्निंजनयन्त मातरः|	him duly coming as their germ have plants received this agni have maternal waters brought to life.
तमित समानं वनिनश्च वीरुधोऽनतर्वतीश्च सुवते च विश्वहा|	so in like manner do the forest trees and plants bear him within them and produce him evermore.
वातोपधूत इषितो वशाननु तर्षु यदन्ना वेविषद्वितिष्ठसे|	when sped and urged by wind thou spreadest thee abroad swift piercing through thy food according to thy will.
आ ते यतन्ते रथ्यो यथा पर्थक छर्धांस्यग्ने अजराणि धक्षतः|	thy neverceasing blazes longing to consume like men on chariots agni strive on every side.
मेधाकारं विदथस्य परसाधनमग्निं होतारम्परिभूतमं मतिम|	agni the hotarpriest who fills the assembly full waker of knowledge chief controller of the thought.
तमिदर्भे हविष्या समानमित्तमिन महे वर्णते नान्यं तवत|	him yea none other than thyself doth man elect at sacrificial offerings great and small alike.
तवामिदत्र वर्णते तवायवो होतारमग्ने विदथेषुवेधसः|	here agni the arrangers those attached to thee elect thee as their priest in sacred gatherings.
यद देवयन्तो दधति परयाण्सि ते हविष्मन्तोमनवो वर्क्तबर्हिषः|	when men with strewn clipt grass and sacrificial gifts offer thee entertainment piously inclined.
तवाग्ने होत्रं तव पोत्रं रत्वियं तव नेष्ट्रं तवमग्निद रतायतः|	thine is the heralds task and cleansers duly timed leader art thou and kindler for the pious man.
तव परशास्त्रं तवमध्वरीयसि बरह्माचासि गर्हपतिश्च नो दमे|	thou art director thou the ministering priest thou art the brahman lord and master in our home.
यस्तुभ्यमग्ने अम्र्ताय मर्त्यः समिधा दाशदुत वाहविष्क्र्ति|	when mortal man presents to thee immortal god agni his fuel or his sacrificial gift.
तस्य होता भवसि यासि दूत्यमुप बरूषेयजस्यध्वरीयसि|	then thou art his adhvaryu hotar messenger callest the gods and orderest the sacrifice.
इमा अस्मै मतयो वाचो अस्मदान रचो गिरः सुष्टुतयःसमग्मत|	from us these hymns in concert have gone forth to him these holy words these Ṛcas songs and eulogies.
वसूयवो वसवे जातवेदसे वर्द्धासु चिद वर्धनोयासु चाकनत|	eager for wealth to jātavedas fain for wealth when they have waxen strong they please their strengthener.
इमां परत्नाय सुष्टुतिं नवीयसीं वोचेयमस्मा उशतेश्र्णोतु नः|	this newest eulogy will i speak forth to him the ancient one who loves it may he hear our voice.
भूया अन्तरा हर्द्यस्य निस्प्र्शे जायेवपत्य उशती सुवासाः|	may it come near his heart and make it stir with love as a fond welldressed matron clings about her lord.
यस्मिन्नश्वास रषभास उक्षणो वशा मेषावस्र्ष्टास आहुताः|	he in whom horses bulls oxen and barren cows and rams when duly set apart are offered up.
कीलालपे सोमप्र्ष्ठाय वेधसेह्र्दा मतिं जनये चारुमग्नये|	to agni somasprinkled drinker of sweet juice disposer with my heart i bring a fair hymn forth.
अहाव्यग्ने हविरास्ये ते सरुचीव घर्तं चम्वीव सोमः|	into thy mouth is poured the offering agni as soma into cup oil into ladle.
वाजसनिं रयिमस्मे सुवीरं परशस्तं धेहि यशसम्ब्र्हन्तम|	vouchsafe us wealth strengthwinning blest with heroes wealth lofty praised by men and full of splendour.
विभ्राड बर्हत पिबतु सोम्यं मध्वायुर्दधद यज्ञपतावविह्रुतम|	may the bright god drink glorious somamingled meath giving the sacrifices lord uninjured life.
वातजूतो यो अभिरक्षति तमना परजाः पुपोषपुरुधा वि राजति|	he who windurged in person guards our offspring well hath nourished them with food and shines oer many a land.
विभ्राड बर्हत सुभ्र्तं वाजसातमं धर्मन दिवो धरुणेसत्यमर्पितम|	radiant as high truth cherished best at winning strength truth based upon the statute that supports the heavens.
अमित्रहा वर्त्रहा दस्युहन्तमं जयोतिर्जज्ञेसुरहा सपत्नहा|	he rose a light that kills vṛtras and enemies best slayer of the dasyus asuras and foes.
इदं शरेष्ठं जयोतिषां जयोतिरुत्तमं विश्वजिद्धनजिदुच्यते बर्हत|	this light the best of lights supreme allconquering winner of riches is exalted with high laud.
विश्वभ्राड भराजो महि सूर्यो दर्शौरु पप्रथे सह ओजो अच्युतम|	alllighting radiant mighty as the sun to see he spreadeth wide unfailing victory and strength.
विभ्राजञ जयोतिषा सवरगछो रोचनं दिवः|	beaming forth splendour with thy light thou hast attained heavens lustrous realm.
येनेमाविश्वा भुवनान्याभ्र्ता विश्वकर्मणा विश्वदेव्यावता|	by thee were brought together all existing things possessor of all godhead alleffecting god.
मयोभूर्वातो अभि वातूस्रा ऊर्जस्वतीरोषधीरारिशन्ताम|	may the wind blow upon our cows with healing may they eat herbage full of vigorous juices.
पीवस्वतीर्जीवधन्याः पिबन्त्ववसाय पद्वतेरुद्र मर्ळ|	may they drink waters rich in life and fatness to food that moves on feet be gracious rudra.
याः सरूपा विरूपा एकरूपा यासामग्निरिष्ट्यानामानि वेद|	likecoloured varioushued or singlecoloured whose names through sacrifice are known to agni.
या अङगिरसस्तपसेह चक्रुस्ताभ्यःपर्जन्य महि शर्म यछ|	whom the aṅgirases produced by fervourvouchsafe to these parjanya great protection.
या देवेषु तन्वमैरयन्त यासां सोमो विश्वा रूपाणिवेद|	those who have offered to the gods their bodies whose varied forms are all well known to soma.
ता अस्मभ्यं पयसा पिन्वमानाः परजावतीरिन्द्रगोष्ठे रिरीहि|	those grant us in our cattlepen o indra with their full streams of milk and plenteous offspring.
परजापतिर्मह्यमेता रराणो विश्वैर्देवैः पित्र्भिःसंविदानः|	prajāpati bestowing these upon me oneminded with all gods and with the fathers.
शिवाः सतीरुप नो गोष्ठमाकस्तासांवयं परजया सं सदेम|	hath to our cowpen brought auspicious cattle so may we own the offspring they will bear us.
अग्ने अछा वदेह नः परत्यं नः सुमना भव|	turn hither agni speak to us come to us with a gracious mind.
पर नोयछ विशस पते धनदा असि नस्त्वम|	enrich us master of the house thou art the giver of our wealth.
पर नो यछत्वर्यमा पर भगः पर बर्हस्पतिः|	let aryarnan vouchsafe us wealth and bhaga and bṛhaspati.
परदेवाः परोत सून्र्ता रायो देवी ददातु नः|	let the gods give their gifts and let sūnṛtā goddess grant us wealth.
सोमं राजानमवसेअग्निं गीर्भिर्हवामहे|	we call king soma to our aid and agni with our songs and hymns.
आदित्यान्विष्णुं सूर्यं बरह्माणं च बर्हस्पतिम|	Ādityas viṣṇu sūrya and the brahman priest bṛhaspati.
इन्द्रवायू बर्हस्पतिं सुहवेह हवामहे|	indra vāyu bṛhaspati gods swift to listen we invoke.
यथा नः सर्वैज्जनः संगत्यां सुमना असत|	that in the synod all the folk may be benevolent to us.
अर्यमणं बर्हस्पतिमिन्द्रं दानाय चोदय|	urge aryaman to send us gifts and indra and bṛhaspati.
वातंविष्णुं सरस्वतीं सवितारं च वाजिनम|	vāta viṣṇu sarasvatī and the strong courser savitar.
तवं नो अग्ने अग्निभिर्ब्रह्म यज्ञं च वर्धय|	do thou o agni with thy fires strengthen our prayer and sacrifice.
तवं नोदेवतातये रायो दानाय चोदय|	urge givers to bestow their wealth to aid our service of the gods.
तव तय इन्द्र सख्येषु वह्नय रतं मन्वाना वयदर्दिरुर्वलम|	allied with thee in friendship indra these thy priests remembering holy law rent vṛtra limb from limb.
यत्रा दशस्यन्नुषसो रिणन्नपः कुत्सायमन्मन्नह्यश्च दंसयः|	when they bestowed the dawns and let the waters flow and when thou didst chastise dragons at kutsas call.
अवास्र्जः परस्वः शवञ्चयो गिरिनुदाज उस्रा अपिबोमधु परियम|	thou sentest forth productive powers clavest the hills thou dravest forth the kine thou drankest pleasant meath.
अवर्धयो वनिनो अस्य दंससा शुशोचसूर्य रतजातया गिरा|	thou gavest increase through this trees surpassing might the sun shone by the hymn that sprang from holy law.
वि सूर्यो मध्ये अमुचद रथं दिवो विदद दासय परतिमानमार्यः|	in the midway of heaven the sun unyoked his car the Ārya found a match to meet his dam foe.
दर्ळानि पिप्रोरसुरस्य मायिन इन्द्रो वयास्यच्चक्र्वान रजिश्वना|	associate with Ṛjiśvan indra overthrew the solid forts of pipru conjuring asura.
अनाध्र्ष्टानि धर्षितो वयास्यन निधीन्रदेवानम्र्णदयास्यः|	he boldly cast down forts which none had eer assailed unwearied he destroycd the godless treasurestores.
मासेव सूर्यो वसु पुर्यमा ददे गर्णानःशत्रून्रश्र्णाद विरुक्मता|	like sun and moon he took the strongholds wealth away and praised in song demolished foes with flashing dart.
अयुद्धसेनो विभ्वा विभिन्दता दाशद वर्त्रहा तुज्यानि तेजते|	armed with resistless weapons with vast power to cleave the vṛtraslayer whets his darts and deals fordi wounds.
इन्द्रस्य वज्रादबिभेदभिश्नथः पराक्रामच्छुन्ध्युरजहदुष अनः|	bright uṣas was afraid of indras slaughtering bolt she went upon her way and left her chariot there.
एता तया ते शरुत्यानि केवला यदेक एकमक्र्णोरयज्ञम|	these are thy famous exploits only thine when thou alone hast left the other reft of sacrifice.
मासां विधानमदधा अधि दयवि तवया विभिन्नम्भरति परधिं पिता|	thou in the heavens hast set the ordering of the moons the father bears the felly portioned out by thee.
विश्वो हयन्यो अरिराजगाम ममेदह शवशुरो न जगाम|	now all my other friends are here assembled my sireinlaw alone hath not come hither.
जक्षीयाद धना उत सोमं पपीयात सवाशितः पुनरस्तं जगायात|	so might he eat the grain and drink the soma and satisfied return unto his dwelling.
स रोरुवद वर्षभस्तिग्मश्र्न्गो वर्ष्मन तस्थाु वरिमन्नाप्र्थिव्याः|	loud belloweth the bull whose horns are sharpened upon the height above earths breadth he standeth.
विश्वेष्वेनं वर्जनेषु पामि यो मे कुक्षिसुतसोमः पर्णाति|	that man i guard and save in all his troubles who fills my flanks when he hath shed the soma.
अद्रिणा ते मन्दिन इन्द्र तूयान सुन्वन्ति सोमान पिबसि तवमेशाम|	men with the stone press out for thee o indra strong gladdening soma and thereof thou drinkest.
पचन्ति ते वर्षभानत्सि तेषां पर्क्षेण यन्मघवन हूयमानः|	bulls they dress for thee and of these thou eatest when maghavan with food thou art invited.
इदं सु मे जरितरा चिकिद्धि परतीपं शापं नद्योवहन्ति|	resolve for me o singer this my riddle the rivers send their swelling water backward.
लोपाशः सिंहं परत्यञ्चमत्साः करोष्टावराहं निरतक्त कक्षात|	the fox steals up to the approaching lion the jackal drives the wildboar from the brushwood.
कथ त एतदहमा चिकेतं गर्त्सस्य पाकस्तवसोमनीषाम|	how shall i solve this riddle i the simple declare the thought of thee the wise and mighty.
तवं नो विद्वान रतुथा वि वोचो यमर्धं तेमघवन कषेम्या धूः|	tell us well knowing as befits the season whitherward is thy prosperous car advancing.
एवा हि मां तवसं वर्धयन्ति दिवश्चिन मे बर्हतौत्तरा धुः|	thus do they magnify me me the mighty higher than even high heaven is my carpole.
पुरू सहस्रा नि शिशामि साकमशत्रुंहि म जनिता जजान|	i all at once demolish many thousands my sire begot me with no foe to match me.
एवा हि मां तवसं जज्ञुरुग्रं कर्मनकर्मन वर्षणमिन्द्र देवाः|	yea and the gods have known me also indra as mighty fierce and strong in every exploit.
वधीं वर्त्रं वज्रेण मन्दसनोअप वरजम्महिना दाशुषे वम|	exulting with the bolt i slaughtered vṛtra and for the offerer oped with might the cowstall.
देवास आयन परशून्रबिभ्रन वना वर्श्चन्तो अभि विड्भिरायन|	the deities approached they carried axes splitting the wood they came with their attendants.
नि सुद्र्वं दधतो वक्षणासु यत्रा कर्पीटमनुतद दहन्ति|	they laid good timber in the firereceivers and burnt the grass up where they found it growing.
शशः कषुरं परत्यञ्चं जगाराद्रिं लोगेन वयभेदमारात|	the hare hath swallowed up the opposing razor i sundered with a clod the distant mountain.
बर्हन्तं चिद रहते रन्धयानि वयद वत्सो वर्षभंशूशुवानः|	the great will i make subject to the little the calf shall wax in strength and cat the bullock.
सुपर्ण इत्था नखमा सिषायावरुद्धः परिपदं नसिंहः|	there hath the strongwinged eagle left his talon as a snared lion leaves the trap that caught him.
निरुद्धश्चिन महिषस्तर्ष्यावान गोधा तस्मायथं कर्षदेतत|	even the wild steer in his thirst is captured the leather strap still holds his foot entangled.
तेभ्यो गोधा अयथं कर्षदेतद ये बरह्मणः परतिपियन्त्यन्नैः|	so may the leather strap their foot entangle who fatten on the viands of the brahman.
सिम उक्ष्णोअवस्र्ष्टानदन्ति सवयं बलानितन्वः शर्णानाः|	they all devour the bulls set free to wander while they themselves destroy their bodies vigour.
एते शमीभिः सुशमी अभूवन ये हिन्विरे तन्वः सोमौक्थैः|	they were well occupied with holy duties who sped in person with their lauds to soma.
नर्वद वदन्नुप नो माहि वाजान दिवि शरवोदधिषे नाम वीरः|	speaking like man mete to us wealth and booty in heaven thou hast the name and fame of hero.
पर मा युयुज्रे परयुजो जनानां वहामि सम पुषणमन्तरेण|	the urgings of the people have impelled me and bythe nearest way i bring you pūṣan.
विश्वे देवासो अध मामरक्षन दुःशासुरागादिति घोष आसीत|	the universal gods have brought me safely the cry was heard behold dubsasu cometh.
सं मा तपन्त्यभितः सपत्नीरिव पर्शवः|	the ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me like rival wives.
नि बाधतेमतिर्नग्नता जसुर्वेर्न वेवीयते मतिः|	indigence nakedness exhaustion press me sore my mind is fluttering like a birds.
मूषो न शिश्ना वयदन्ति माध्य सतोतारं ते शतक्रतो|	as rats eat weavers threads cares are consuming me thy singer gatakratu me.
सक्र्त सु नो मघवन्निन्द्र मर्ळयाधा पितेव नो भव|	have mercy on us once o indra bounteous lord be thou a father unto us.
कुरुश्रवणमाव्र्णि राजानं तरासदस्यवम|	i the priests Ṛṣi chose as prince most liberal kurusravana.
मंहिष्ठंवाघतां रषिः|	the son of trasadasyus son.
यस्य मा हरितो रथे तिस्रो वहन्ति साधुया|	whose three bays harnessed to the car bear me straight onward i will laud.
सतवैसहस्रदक्षिणे|	the giver of a thousand meeds.
यस्य परस्वादसो गिर उपमश्रवसः पितुः|	the sire of upamasravas even him whose words were passing sweet.
कषेत्रं नरण्वमूचुषे|	as a fair field is to its lord.
अधि पुत्रोपमश्रवो नपान मित्रातिथेरिहि|	mark upamasravas his son mark grandson of mitratithi.
पितुष टे अस्मिवन्दिता|	i am thy fathers eulogist.
यदीशीयाम्र्तानामुत वा मर्त्यानाम|	if i controlled immortal gods yea even were i lord of men.
जीवेदिन्मघवा मम|	my liberal prince were living still.
न देवानामति वरतं शतात्मा चन जीवति|	none lives even had he hundred lives beyond the statute of the gods.
तथायुजा वि वाव्र्ते|	so am i parted from my friend.
ईङखयन्तीरपस्युव इन्द्रं जातमुपासते|	swaying about the active ones came nigh to indra at his birth.
भेजानसःसुवीर्यम|	and shared his great heroic might.
तवमिन्द्र बलादधि सहसो जात ओजसः|	based upon strength and victory and power o indra is thy birth.
तवं वर्षन्व्र्षेदसि|	thou mighty one art strong indeed.
तवमिन्द्रासि वर्त्रहा वयन्तरिक्षमतिरः|	thou art the vṛtraslayer thou indra hast spread the firmament.
उद दयामस्तभ्ना ओजसा|	thou hast with might upheld the heavens.
तवमिन्द्र सजोषसमर्कं बिभर्षि बाह्वोः|	thou indra bearest in thine arms the lightning that accords with thee.
वज्रंशिशान ओजसा|	whetting thy thunderbolt with might.
तवमिन्द्राभिभूरसि विश्वा जातान्योजसा|	thou indra art preeminent over all creatures in thy might.
स विश्वाभुव आभवः|	thou hast pervaded every place.
परैते वदन्तु पर वयं वदाम गरावभ्यो वाचं वदतावदद्भ्यः|	let these speak loudly forth let us speak out aloud to the loud speaking pressingstones address the speech.
यदद्रयः पर्वताः साकमाशवः शलोकंघोषं भरथेन्द्राय सोमिनः|	when rich with soma juice stones of the mountain ye united swift to indra bring the sound of praise.
एते वदन्ति शतवत सहस्रवदभि करन्दन्ति हरितेभिरासभिः|	they speak out like a hundred like a thousand men they cry aloud to us with their greentinted mouths.
विष्ट्वी गरावाणः सुक्र्तः सुक्र्त्यया होतुश्चित पूर्वे हविरद्यमाशत|	while pious stones they ply their task with piety and even before the hotar taste the offered food.
एते वदन्त्यविदन्नना मधु नयूङखयन्ते अधि पक्वामिषि|	loudly they speak for they have found the savoury meath they make a humming sound over the meat prepared.
वर्क्षस्य शाखामरुणस्य बप्सतस्ते सूभर्वाव्र्षभाः परेमराविषुः|	as they devour the branch of the redcoloured tree these the wellpastured bulls have uttered bellowings.
बर्हद वदन्ति मदिरेण मन्दिनेन्द्रं करोशन्तोअविदन्ननामधु|	they cry aloud with strong exhilarating drink calling on indra now for they have found the meath.
संरभ्या धीराः सवस्र्भिरनर्तिषुराघोषयन्तः पर्थिवीमुपब्दिभिः|	bold with the sisters they have danced embraced by them making the earth reecho with their ringing sound.
सुपर्णा वाचमक्रतोप दयव्याखरे कर्ष्णा इषिरानर्तिषुः|	the eagles have sent forth their cry aloft in heaven in the skys vault the dark impetuous ones have danced.
नयं नि यन्त्युपरस्य निष्क्र्तं पुरू रेतोदधिरे सूर्यश्वितः|	then downward to the nether stones fixt place they sink and splendid as the sun effuse their copious stream.
उग्रा इव परवहन्तः समायमुः साकं युक्ता वर्षणोबिभ्रतो धुरः|	like strong ones drawing they have put forth all their strength the bulls harnessed together bear the chariotpoles.
यच्छ्वसन्तो जग्रसाना अराविषुःश्र्ण्व एषां परोथथो अर्वतामिव|	when they have bellowed panting swallowing their food the sound of their loud snorting is like that of steeds.
दशावनिभ्यो दशकक्ष्येभ्यो दशयोक्त्रेभ्यो दशयोजनेभ्यः|	to these who have ten workers and a tenfold girth to these who have ten yokestraps and ten binding thongs.
दशाभीशुभ्यो अर्चताजरेभ्यो दश धुरो दश युक्तावहद्भ्यः|	to these who bear ten reins the eternal sing ye praise to these who bear ten carpoles ten when they are yoked.
ते अद्रयो दशयन्त्रास आशवस्तेषामाधानं पर्येतिहर्यतम|	these stones with ten conductors rapid in their course with lovely revolution travel round and round.
त ऊ सुतस्य सोम्यस्यान्धसोअंशोः पीयूषम्प्रथमस्य भेजिरे|	they have been first to drink the flowing soma juice first to enjoy the milky fluid of the stalk.
ते सोमादो हरी इन्द्रस्य निंसतेअंशुं दुहन्तो अध्यासतेगवि|	these somaeaters kiss indras baycoloured steeds draining the stalk they sit upon the oxs hide.
तेभिर्दुग्धं पपिवान सोम्यं मध्विन्द्रो वर्धतेप्रथते वर्षायते|	indra when he hath drunk somameath drawn by them waxes in strength is famed is mighty as a bull.
वर्षा वो अंशुर्न किला रिषाथनेलावन्तः सदमित्स्थनाशिताः|	strong is your stalk ye verily never shall be harmed ye have refreshment ye are ever satisfied.
रैवत्येव महसा चारव सथन यस्यग्रावाणो अजुषध्वमध्वरम|	fair are ye as it were through splendour of his wealth his in whose sacrifice o stones ye find delight.
तर्दिला अत्र्दिलासो अद्रयोअश्रमणा अश्र्थिता अम्र्त्यवः|	bored deep but not pierced through with holes are ye o stones not loosened never weary and exempt from death.
अनातुरा अजरा सथामविष्णवः सुपीवसो अत्र्षितात्र्ष्णजः|	eternal undiseased moving in sundry ways unthirsting full of fatness void of all desire.
धरुवा एव वः पितरो युगेयुगे कषेमकामासः सदसो नयुञ्जते|	your fathers verily stand firm from age to age they loving rest are not dissevered from their seat.
अजुर्यासो हरिषाचो हरिद्रव आ दयां रवेणप्र्थिवीमशुश्रवुः|	untouched by time neer lacking green plants and green trees they with their voice have caused the heavens and earth to hear.
तदिद वदन्त्यद्रयो विमोचने यामन्नञ्जस्पा इव घेदुपब्दिभिः|	this this the stones proclaim what time they are disjoined and when with ringing sounds they move and drink the balm.
वपन्तो बीजमिव धान्याक्र्तः पर्ञ्चन्तिसोमं न मिनन्ति बप्सतः|	like tillers of the ground when they are sowing seed they mix the soma nor devouring minish it.
सुते अध्वरे अधि वाचमक्रता करीळयो न मातरन्तुदन्तः|	they have raised high their voice for juice for sacrifice striking the mother earth as though they danced thereon.
वि षू मुञ्चा सुषुवुषो मनीषां वि वर्तन्तामद्रयश्चायमानाः|	so loose thou too his thought who hath effused the sap and let the stones which we are honouring be disjoined.
अग्ने तव शरवो वयो महि भराजन्ते अर्चयो विभावसो|	agni lifepower and fame are thine thy fires blaze mightily thou rich in wealth of beams.
बर्हद्भानो शवसा वाजमुक्थ्यं दधासि दाशुषे कवे|	sage passing bright thou givest to the worshipper with strength the food that merits laud.
पावकवर्चाः शुक्रवर्चा अनूनवर्चा उदियर्षि भानुना|	with brilliant purifying sheen with perfect sheen thou liftest up thyself in light.
पुत्रो मातरा विचरन्नुपावसि पर्णक्षि रोदसी उभे|	thou visiting both thy mothers aidest them as son thou joinest close the earth and heaven.
ऊर्जो नपाज्जातवेदः सुशस्तिभिर्मन्दस्व धीतिभिर्हितः|	o jātavedas son of strength rejoice ihyself gracious in our fair hymns and songs.
तवे इषः सं दधुर्भूरिवर्पसश्चित्रोतयो वामजाताः|	in thee are treasured various forms of strengthening food born nobly and of wondrous help.
इरज्यन्नग्ने परथयस्व जन्तुभिरस्मे रायो अमर्त्य|	agni spread forth as ruler over living things give wealth to us immortal god.
सदर्शतस्य वपुषो वि राजसि पर्णक्षि सानसिं करतुम|	thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon thou leadest us to conquering power.
इष्कर्तारमध्वरस्य परचेतसं कषयन्तं राधसो महः|	to him the wise who orders sacrifice who hath great riches un der his control.
रातिं वामस्य सुभगां महीमिषं दधासि सानसिंरयिम|	thou givest blest award of good and plenteous food givest him wealth that conquers all.
रतावानं महिषं विश्वदर्शतमग्निं सुम्नाय दधिरेपुरो जनाः|	the men have set before them them for their welfare agni strong visible to all the holy.
शरुत्कर्णं सप्रथस्तमं तवा गिरा दैव्यम्मानुषा युगा|	thee godlike one with ears to hear most famous mens generations magnify with praisesongs.
तयमू षु वाजिनं देवजूतं सहावानं तरुतारंरथानाम|	this very mighty one whom gods commission the conqueror of cars ever triumphant.
अरिष्टनेमिं पर्तनाजमाशुं सवस्तयेतार्क्ष्यमिहा हुवेम|	swift fleet to battle with uninjured fellies even tārkṣya for our weal will we call hither.
इन्द्रस्येव रातिमाजोहुवानाः सवस्तये नावमिवा रुहेम|	as though we offered up our gifts to indra may we ascend him as a ship for safety.
उर्वी न पर्थ्वी बहुले गभीरे मा वामेतौ मा परेतौरिषाम|	like the two wide worlds broad deep farextended may we be safe both when he comes and leaves you.
सद्यश्चिद यः शवसा पञ्च कर्ष्टीः सूर्य इवज्योतिषापस्ततान|	he who with might the five lands hath pervaded like sūrya with his lustre and the waters.
सहस्रसाः शतसा अस्य रंहिर्नस्मा वरन्ते युवतिं न शर्याम|	his strength wins hundreds thousands none avert it as the young maid repelleth not her lover.
देवाः कपोत इषितो यदिछन दूतो निरतया इदमाजगाम|	gods whatsoeer the dove came hither seeking sent to us as the envoy of destruction.
तस्मा अर्चाम कर्णवाम निष्क्र्तिं शं नो अस्तु दविपदेशं चतुष्पदे|	for that let us sing hymns and make atonement well be it with our quadrupeds and bipeds.
शिवः कपोत इषितो नो अस्त्वनागा देवाः शकुनो गर्हेषु|	auspicious be the dove that hath been sent us a harmless bird ye gods within our dwelling.
अग्निर्हि विप्रो जुषतां हविर्नः परि हेतिः पक्षिणी नोव्र्णक्तु|	may agni sage be pleased with our oblation and may the missile borne on wings avoid us.
हेतिः पक्षिणी न दभात्यस्मानाष्ट्र्यां पदं कर्णुतेग्निधाने|	let not the arrow that hath wings distract us beside the fireplace on the hearth it settles.
शं नो गोभ्यश्च पुरुषेभ्यश्चास्तु मा नोहिंसीदिह देवाः कपोतः|	may it bring welfare to our men and cattle here let the dove ye gods forbear to harm us.
यदुलूको वदति मोघमेतद यत कपोतः पदमग्नौक्र्णोति|	the screeching of the owl is ineffective and when beside the fire the dove hath settled.
यस्य दूतः परहित एष एतत तस्मै यमाय नमोस्तु मरित्यवे|	to him who sent it hither as an envoy to him be reverence paid to death to yama.
रचा कपोतं नुदत परणोदमिषं मदन्तः परि गांनयध्वम|	drive forth the dove chase it with holy verses rejoicing bring ye hither food and cattle.
संयोपयन्तो दुरितानि विश्वा हित्वा न ऊर्जं परपतात पतिष्थः|	barring the way against all grief and trouble let the swift bird fly forth and leave us vigour.
पर ते महे विदथे शंसिषं हरी पर ते वन्वे वनुषोहर्यतं मदम|	in the great synod will i laud thy two bay steeds i prize the sweet strong drink of thee the warriorgod.
घर्तं न यो हरिभिश्चारु सेचत आ तवाविशन्तु हरिवर्पसं गिरः|	his who pours lovely oil as twere with yellow drops let my songs enter thee whose form hath golden tints.
हरिं हि योनिमभि ये समस्वरन हिन्वन्तो हरी दिव्यंयथा सदः|	ye who in concert sing unto the goldhued place like bay steeds driving onward to the heavenly seat.
आ यं पर्णन्ति हरिभिर्न धेनव इन्द्रायशूषं हरिवन्तमर्चत|	for indra laud ye strength allied with tawny steeds laud him whom cows content as twere with yellow drops.
सो अस्य वज्रो हरितो य आयसो हरिर्निकामो हरिरागभस्त्योः|	his is that thunderbolt of iron goldenhued goldcoloured very dear and yellow in his arms.
दयुम्नी सुशिप्रो हरिमन्युसायक इन्द्रे नि रूपाहरिता मिमिक्षिरे|	bright with strong teeth destroying with its tawny rage in indra are set fast all forms of golden hue.
दिवि न केतुरधि धायि हर्यतो विव्यचद वज्रो हरितो नरंह्या|	as if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky the golden thunderbolt spread out as in a race.
तुददहिं हरिशिप्रो य आयसः सहस्रशोकाभवद धरिम्भरः|	that iron bolt with yellow jaw smote ahi down a thousand flames had he who bore the tawnyhued.
तवंतवमहर्यथा उपस्तुतः पूर्वेभिरिन्द्र हरिकेशयज्वभिः|	thou thou when praised by men who sacrificed of old hadst pleasure in their lauds o indra goldenhaired.
तवं हर्यसि तव विश्वमुक्थ्यमसामि राधोहरिजात हर्यतम|	all that befits thy song of praise thou welcornest the perfect pleasant gift o goldenhued from birth.
ता वज्रिणं मन्दिनं सतोम्यं मद इन्द्रं रथे वहतोहर्यता हरी|	these two dear bays bring hither indra on his car thunderarmed joyous meet for laud to drink his fill.
पुरूण्यस्मै सवनानि हर्यत इन्द्रायसोमा हरयो दधन्विरे|	many libations flow for him who loveth them to indra have the goldhued soma juices run.
अरं कामाय हरयो दधन्विरे सथिराय हिन्वन हरयो हरीतुरा|	tle goldhued drops have flowed to gratify his wish the yellow dro s have urged the swift bays to the strong.
अर्वद्भिर्यो हरिभिर्जोषमीयते सो अस्य कामंहरिवन्तमानशे|	he who speeds on with bay steeds even as he lists hath satisfied his longing for the golden drops.
हरिश्मशारुर्हरिकेश आयसस्तुरस्पेये यो हरिपावर्धत|	at the swift draught the somadrinker waxed in might the iron one with yellow beard and yellow hair.
अर्वद्भिर्यो हरिभिर्वाजिनीवसुरति विश्वादुरिता पारिषद धरी|	he lord of tawny coursers lord of fleetfoot mares will bear his bay steeds safely over all distress.
सरुवेव यस्य हरिणी विपेततुः शिप्रे वाजाय हरिणीदविध्वतः|	his yellowcoloured jaws like ladles move apart what time for strength he makes the yellowtinted stir.
पर यत कर्ते चमसे मर्म्र्जद धरी पीत्वामदस्य हयतस्याधसः|	when while the bowl stands there he grooms his tawny steeds when he hath drunk strong drink the sweet juice that he loves.
उत सम सद्म हर्यतस्य पस्त्योरत्यो न वाजं हरिवानचिक्रदत|	yea to the dear ones seat in homes of heaven and earth the bay steeds lord hath whinnied like a horse for food.
मही चिद धि धिषणाहर्यदोजसा बर्हद वयोदधिषे हर्यतश्चिदा|	then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily and the beloved one hath gained high power of life.
आ रोदसी हर्यमाणो महित्वा नव्यंनव्यं हर्यसि मन्मनु परियम|	thou comprehending with thy might the earth and heaven acceptest the dear hymn for ever new and new.
पर पस्त्यमसुर हर्यतं गोराविष्क्र्धि हरयेसूर्याय|	o asura disclose thou and make visible the cows beloved home to the bright golden sun.
आ तवा हर्यन्तं परयुजो जनानां रथे वहन्तु हरिशिप्रमिन्द्र|	o indra let the eager wishes of the folk bring thee delightful goldenvisored on thy car.
पिबा यथा परतिभ्र्तस्य मध्वो हर्यन यज्ञंसधमादे दशोणिम|	that pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil thou mayest at the feast drink of our offered meath.
अपाः पूर्वेषां हरिवः सुतानामथो इदं सवनंकेवलं ते|	juices aforetime lord of bays thou drankest and thine especially is this libation.
ममद्धि सोमं मधुमन्तमिन्द्र सत्रा वर्षञ्जठर आ वर्षस्व|	gladden thee indra with the meathrich soma pour it down ever mighty one within thee.
वर्षा वर्ष्णे दुदुहे दोहसा दिवः पयांसि यह्वो अदितेरदाभ्यः|	the bull hath yielded for the bull the milk of heaven the son of aditi can never be deceived.
विश्वं स वेद वरुणो यथा धिया सयज्ञियो यजतु यज्ञियान रतून|	according to his wisdom varuṇa knoweth all may he the holy hallow times for sacrifice.
रपद गन्धर्वीरप्या च योषणा नदस्य नादे परि पातुमे मनः|	gandharvi spake may she the lady of the flood amid the rivers roaring leave my heart untouched.
इष्टस्य मध्ये अदितिर्नि धातु नो भराता नोज्येष्ठः परथमो वि वोचति|	may aditi accomplish all that we desire and may our eldest brother tell us this as chief.
सो चिन नु भद्रा कषुमती यशस्वत्युषा उवास मनवेस्वर्वती|	yea even this blessed morning rich in store of food splendid with heavenly lustre hath shone out for man.
यदीमुशन्तमुशतामनु करतुमग्निंहोतारं विदथाय जीजनन|	since they as was the wish of yearning gods brought forth that yearning agni for the assembly as the priest.
अध तयं दरप्सं विभ्वं विचक्षणं विराभरदिषितः शयेनो अध्वरे|	and the fleet falcon brought for sacrifice from afar this flowing drop most excellent and keen of sight.
यदी विशो वर्णते दस्ममार्याग्निं होतारमध धीरजायत|	then when the Āryan tribes chose as invoking priest agni the wonderworker and the hymn rose up.
सदासि रण्वो यवसेव पुष्यते होत्राभिरग्ने मनुषःस्वध्वरः|	still art thou kind to him who feeds thee as with grass and skilled in sacrifice offers thee holy gifts.
विप्रस्य वा यच्छशमान उक्थ्यं वाजंससवानुपयासि भूरिभिः|	when thou having received the sages strengthening food with lauds after long toil cornest with many more.
उदीरय पितरा जार आ भगमियक्षति हर्यतो हर्त्तैष्यति|	urge thou thy parents as a lover  to delight the lovely one desires and craves it from his heart.
विवक्ति वह्निः सवपस्यते मखस्तविष्यते असुरोवेपते मती|	the priest calls out the sacrificer shows his skill the asura tries his strength and with the hymn is stirred.
यस्ते अग्ने सुमतिं मर्तो अक्षत सहसः सूनो अति स परश्र्ण्वे|	farfamed is he the mortal man o agni thou son of strength who hath obtained thy favour.
इषं दधानो वहमानो अश्वैरा स दयुमानमवान भूषति दयून|	he gathering power borne onward by his horses makes his days lovely in his might and splendour.
यदग्न एषा समितिर्भवाति देवी देवेषु यजता यजत्र|	when holy agni the divine assembly the sacred synod mid the gods is gathered.
रत्ना च यद विभजासि सवधावो भागं नो अत्र वसुमन्तंवीतात|	and when thou godlike one dealest forth treasures vouchsafe us too our portion of the riches.
शरुधी नो अग्ने सदने सधस्थे युक्ष्वा रथमम्र्तस्यद्रवित्नुम|	hear us o agni in your common dwelling harness thy rapid car of amṛta.
आ नो वह रोदसी देवपुत्रे माकिर्देवानामपभूरिह सयाः|	bring heaven and earth the deities parents hither stay with us here nor from the gods be distant.
देवानां नु वयं जाना पर वोचाम विपन्यया|	let us with tuneful skill proclaim these generations of the gods.
उक्थेषुशस्यमानेषु यः पश्यादुत्तरे युगे|	that one may see them when these hymns are chanted in a future age.
बरह्मणस पतिरेता सं कर्मार इवाधमत|	these brahmaṇaspati produced with blast and smelting like a smith.
देवानाम्पूर्व्ये युगेअसतः सदजायत|	existence in an earlier age of gods from nonexistence sprang.
देवानां युगे परथमेअसतः सदजायत|	existence in the earliest age of gods from nonexistence sprang.
तदाशा अन्वजायन्त तदुत्तानपदस परि|	thereafter were the regions born this sprang from the productive power.
भूर्जज्ञ उत्तानपदो भुव आशा अजायन्त|	earth sprang from the productive power the regions from the earth were born.
अदितेर्दक्षोजायत दक्षाद वदितिः परि|	dakṣa was born of aditi and aditi was dakṣas child.
अदितिर्ह्यजनिष्ट दक्ष या दुहिता तव|	for aditi o dakṣa she who is thy daughter was brought forth.
तां देवान्वजायन्त भद्रा अम्र्तबन्धवः|	after her were the blessed gods born sharers of immortal life.
यद देवा अदः सलिले सुसंरब्धा अतिष्ठत|	when ye o gods in yonder deep closeclasping one another stood.
अत्रा वोन्र्त्यतामिव तीव्रो रेणुरपायत|	thence as of dancers from your feet a thickening cloud of dust arose.
यद देवा यतयो यथा भुवनान्यपिन्वत|	when o ye gods like yatis ye caused all existing things to grow.
अत्रा समुद्रा गूळमा सूर्यमजभर्तन|	then ye brought sūrya forward who was lying hidden in the sea.
अष्टौ पुत्रासो अदितेर्ये जातास्तन्वस परि|	eight are the sons of adid who from her body sprang to life.
देवानुपप्रैत सप्तभिः परा मार्ताण्डमास्यत|	with seven she went to meet the gods she cast martanda far away.
सप्तभिः पुत्रैरदितिरुप परैत पूर्व्यं युगम|	so with her seven sons aditi went forth to meet the earlier age.
परजायै मर्त्यवे तवत पुनर्मार्ताण्डमाभरत|	she brought martanda thitherward to spring to life and die again.
तेअवदन परथमा बरह्मकिल्बिषेअकूपारः सलिलोमातरिश्वा|	these first the boundless sea and mātariśvan fierceglowing fire the strong the blissbestower.
वीळुहरास्तप उग्रो मयोभूरापो देवीःप्रथमजा रतेन|	and heavenly floods firstborn by holy order exclaimed against the outrage on a brahman.
सोमो राजा परथमो बरह्मजायां पुनः परायछदह्र्णीयमानः|	king soma first of all without reluctance made restitution of the brahmans consort.
अन्वर्तिता वरुणो मित्र आसीदग्निर्होताहस्तग्र्ह्या निनाय|	mitra and varuṇa were the inviters agni as hota took her hand and led her.
हस्तेनैव गराह्य आधिरस्या बरह्मजायेयमिति चेदवोचन|	the man her pledge must by her hand be taken when they have cried she is a brahmans consort.
न दूताय परह्ये तस्थ एषा तथा राष्ट्रं गुपितंक्षत्रियस्य|	she stayed not for a herald to conduct her thus is the kingdom of a ruler guarded.
देवा एतस्यामवदन्त पूर्वे सप्तर्षयस्तपसे ये निषेदुः|	thus spake of her those gods of old seven Ṛṣis who sate them down to their austere devotion.
भीमा जाया बराह्मणस्योपनीता दुर्धां दधातिपरमे वयोमन|	dire is a brahmans wife led home by others in the supremest heaven she plants confusion.
बरह्मचारी चरति वेविषद विषः स देवानां भवत्येकमङगम|	the brahmacari goes engaged in duty he is a member of the gods own body.
तेन जायामन्वविन्दद बर्हस्पतिः सोमेन नीतांजुह्वं न देवाः|	through him bṛhaspati obtained his consort as the gods gained the ladle brought by soma.
पुनर्वै देवा अददुः पुनर्मनुष्या उत|	so then the gods restored her so men gave the woman back again.
राजानःसत्यं कर्ण्वाना बरह्मजायां पुनर्ददुः|	the kings who kept their promises restored the brahmans wedded wife.
पुनर्दाय बरह्मजायां कर्त्वी देवैर्निकिल्बिषम|	having restored the brahmans wife and freed them with gods aid from sin.
ऊर्जम्प्र्थिव्या भक्त्वायोरुगायमुपासते|	they shared the fulness of the earth and won themselves extended sway.
अहं भुवं वसुनः पूर्व्यस पतिरहं धनानि संजयामि शश्वतः|	i was the first possessor of all precious gear the wealth of every man i win and gather up.
मां हवन्ते पितरं न जन्तवोअहन्दाशुषे वि भजामि भोजनम|	on me as on a father living creatures call i deal enjoyment to tho man who offers gifts.
अहमिन्द्रो रोधो वक्षो अथर्वणस्त्रिताय गा अजनयमहेरधि|	i indra am atharvans stay and firm support i brought forth kine to trita from the dragons grasp.
अहं दस्युभ्यः परि नर्म्णमा ददे गोत्रा शिक्षन्दधीचे मातरिश्वने|	i stripped the dasyus of their manly might and gave the cattlestalls to matarigvan and dadhyac.
मह्यं तवष्टा वज्रमतक्षदायसं मयि देवासोअव्र्जन्नपि करतुम|	for me hath tvaṣṭar forged the iron thunderbolt in me the gods have centred intellectual power.
ममानीकं सूर्यस्येव दुष्टरं मामार्यन्तिक्र्तेन कर्त्वेन च|	my sheen is like the suns insufferably bright men honour me as lord for past and future deeds.
अहमेतं गव्ययमश्व्यं पशुं पुरीषिणं सायकेनाहिरण्ययम|	i won myself these herdi of cattle steeds and kine and gold in ample store with my destructive bolt.
पुरू सहस्रा नि शिशामि दाशुषे यन मासोमास उक्थिनो अमन्दिषुः|	i give full many a thousand to the worshipper what time the somas and the lauds have made me glad.
अहमिन्द्रो न परा जिग्य इद धनं न मर्त्यवेअव तस्थेकदा चन|	indra am i none ever wins my wealth from me never at any time am i a thrall to death.
सोममिन मा सुन्वन्तो याचता वसु न मेपूरवः सख्ये रिषाथन|	pressing the soma ask riches from me alone ye pūrus in my friendship shall not suffer harm.
अहमेताञ्छाश्वसतो दवादवेन्द्रं ये वज्रं युधयेऽकर्ण्वत|	these breathing loud in fury two and two who caused indra to bring his bolt of thunder to the fray.
आह्वयमानानव हन्मनाहनं दर्ळा वदन्ननमस्युर्नमस्विनः|	the challengers i struck with deadly weapon down firm stand what words the god speaks to his worshippers.
अभीदमेकमेको अस्मि निष्षाळ अभी दवा किमु तरयःकरन्ति|	this one by stronger might i conquered singly yea also two shall three prevail against me.
खले न पर्षान परति हन्मि भूरि किं मा निन्दन्तिशत्रवोअनिन्द्राः|	like many sheaves upon the floor i thrash them how can my foes the indraless revile me.
अहं गुङगुभ्यो अतिथिग्वमिष्करमिषं न वर्त्रतुरंविक्षु धारयम|	against the gungus i made atithigva strong and kept him mid the folk like vṛtraconquering strength.
यत पर्णयघ्न उत वा करञ्जहे पराहम्महे वर्त्रहत्ये अशुश्रवि|	when i won glory in the great foeslaying fight in battle where karanja fell and parṇaya.
पर मे नमी साप्य इषे भुजे भूद गवामेषे सख्याक्र्णुत दविता|	with food for mine enjoyment sapya nami came he joined me as a friend of old in search of kine.
दिद्युं यदस्य समिथेषु मंहयमादिदेनं शंस्यमुक्थ्यं करम|	as i bestowed on him an arrow for the fight i made him worthy of the song apd hymn of praise.
पर नेमस्मिन दद्र्शे सोमो अन्तर्गोपा नेममाविरस्थाक्र्णोति|	one of the two hath soma seen within it the herdsman with the bone shows forth the other.
स तिग्मश्र्ङगं वर्षभं युयुत्सन दरुहस्तस्थौबहुले बद्धो अन्तः|	he fain to fight the bull whose horns were sharpened stood fettered in the demons ample region.
आदित्यानां वसूनां रुद्रियाणां देवो देवानां नमिनामि धाम|	i as a god neer violate the statutes of gods of vasus rudriyas Ādityas.
ते मा भद्राय शवसे ततक्षुरपराजितमस्त्र्तमषाळम|	these gods have formed me for auspicious vigour unconquered and invincible for ever.
तां सु ते कीर्तिं मघवन महित्वा यत तवा भीते रोदसीह्वयेताम|	i sing thy fame that maghavan through thy greatness the heavens and earth invoked thee in their terror.
परावो देवानातिरो दासमोजः परजायैत्वस्यै यदशिक्ष इन्द्र|	thou aiding gods didst quell the power of dāsas what time thou holpest many a race o indra.
यदचरस्तन्वा वाव्र्धानो बलानीन्द्र परब्रुवाणो जनेषु|	when thou wast roaming waxen strong in body telling thy might indra among the people.
मायेत सा ते यानि युद्धान्याहुर्नाद्य शत्रुं ननुपुरा विवित्से|	all that men called thy battles was illusion no foe hast thou today nor erst hast found one.
क उ नु ते महिमनः समस्यास्मत पूर्व रषयोअन्तमापुः|	who are the Ṛṣis then who comprehended before our time the bounds of all thy greatness.
यन मातरं च पितरं च साकमजनयथास्तन्वःस्वायाः|	for from thy body thou hast generated at the same time the mother and the father.
चत्वारि ते असुर्याणि नामादाभ्यानि महिषस्य सन्ति|	thou mighty steer hast four supremest natures asura natures that may neer be injured.
तवमङग तानि विश्वानि वित्से येभिः कर्माणि मघवञ्चकर्थ|	all these o maghavan thou surely knowest wherewith thou hast performed thy great achievements.
तवं विश्वा दधिषे केवलानि यान्याविर्या च गुहावसूनि|	thou hast all treasures in thy sole possession treasures made manifest and treasures hidden.
काममिन मे मघवन मा वि तारीस्त्वमाज्ञातात्वमिन्द्रासि दाता|	defer not thou o maghavan my longing thou art director indra thou art giver.
यो अदधाज्ज्योतिषि जयोतिरन्तर्यो अस्र्जन मधुना सम्मधूनि|	to him who set the light in things of splendour and with all sweetness blent essential sweetness.
अध परियं शूषमिन्द्राय मन्म बरह्मक्र्तोब्र्हदुक्थादवाचि|	to indra hath this welcome hymn that strengthens been uttered by the votary bṛhaduktha.
आग्निं न सवव्र्क्तिभिर्होतारं तवा वर्णीमहे|	with offerings of our own we choose thee agni as invoking priest.
यज्ञायस्तीर्णबर्हिषे वि वो मदे शीरं पावकशोचिषंविवक्षसे|	for sacrifice with trimmed grassat your glad carousepiercing and brightly shining thou art waxing great.
तवामु ते सवाभुवः शुम्भन्त्यश्वराधसः|	the wealthy ones adorn thee they who bring us horses as their gift.
वेति तवामुपसेचनी वि वो मद रजीतिरग्न आहुतिर्विवक्षसे|	the sprinkling ladle agniat your glad carouse and glowing offering taste thee thou art waxing great.
तवे धर्माण आसते जुहूभिः सिञ्चतीरिव|	the holy statutes rest by thee as twere with ladles that oerflow.
कर्ष्णारूपाण्यर्जुना वि वो मदे विश्वा अधि शरियो धिषेविवक्षसे|	black and whitegleaming coloursat your glad carouseall glories thou assurnest thou art waxing great.
यमग्ने मन्यसे रयिं सहसावन्नमर्त्य|	o agni what thou deemest wealth victorious and immortal one.
तमा नोवाजसातये वि वो मदे यज्ञेषु चित्रमा भरा विवक्षसे|	bring thou to give us vigourat your glad carouse splendid at sacrifices thou art waxing great.
अग्निर्जातो अथर्वणा विदद विश्वानि काव्या|	skilled in all lore is agni he whom erst atharvan brought to life.
भुवद दूतोविवस्वतो वि वो मदे परियो यमस्य काम्यो विवक्षसे|	he was vivasvāns envoy at your glad carousethe weilloved friend of yama thou art waxing great.
तवां यज्ञेष्वीळतेअग्ने परयत्यध्वरे|	at sacrifices they adore thee agni when the rite proceeds.
तवं वसूनिकाम्या वि वो मदे विश्वा दधासि दाशुषे विवक्षसे|	all fair and lovely treasuresat your glad carousethou givest him who offers thou art waxing great.
तवां यज्ञेष्व रत्विजं चारुमग्ने नि षेदिरे|	men agni have established thee as welcome priest at holy rites.
घर्तप्रतीकं मनुषो वि वो मदे शुक्रं चेतिष्ठमक्षभिर्विवक्षसे|	thee whose face shines with butterat your glad carousebright with eyes most observant thou art waxing great.
अग्ने शुक्रेण शोचिषोरु परथयसे बर्हत|	wide and aloft thou spreadest thee o agni with thy brilliant flame.
अभिक्रन्दन्व्र्षायसे वि वो मदे गर्भं दधासि जामिषु विवक्षसे|	a bull art thou when bellowingat your glad carousethou dost impregn the sisters thou art waxing great.
सूर्यो नो दिवस पातु वातो अन्तरिक्षात|	may sūrya guard us out of heaven and vāta from the firmament.
अग्निर्नःपार्थिवेभ्यः|	and agni from terrestrial spots.
जोषा सवितर्यस्य ते हरः शतं सवानर्हति|	thou savitar whose flame deserves hundred libations be thou pleased.
पाहिनो दिद्युतः पतन्त्याः|	from failing lightning keep us safe.
चक्षुर्नो देवः सविता चक्षुर्न उत पर्वतः|	may savitar the god and may parvata also give us sight.
चक्षुर्धाता दधातु नः|	may the creator give us sight.
चक्षुर्नो धेहि चक्षुषे चक्षुर्विख्यै तनूभ्यः|	give sight unto our eye give thou our bodies sight that they may see.
संचेदं वि च पश्येम|	may we survey discern this world.
सुसन्द्र्शं तवा वयं परति पश्येम सूर्य|	thus sūrya may we look on thee on thee most lovely to behold.
वि पश्येमन्र्चक्षसः|	see clearly with the eyes of men.
या ओषधीः पूर्वा जाता देवेभ्यस्त्रियुगं पुरा|	herbs that sprang up in time of old three ages earlier than the gods.
मनैनु बभ्रूणामहं शतं धामानि सप्त च|	of these whose hue is brown will i declare the hundred powers and seven.
शतं वो अम्ब धामानि सहस्रमुत वो रुहः|	ye mothers have a hundred homes yea and a thousand are your growths.
अधाशतक्रत्वो यूयमिमं मे अगदं कर्त|	do ye who have a thousand powers free this my patient from disease.
ओषधीः परति मोदध्वं पुष्पवतीः परसूवरीः|	be glad and joyful in the plants both blossoming and bearing fruit.
अश्वािव सजित्वरीर्वीरुधः पारयिष्ण्वः|	plants that will lead us to success like mares who conquer in the race.
ओषधीरिति मातरस्तद वो देवीरुप बरुवे|	plants by this name i speak to you mothers to you the goddesses.
सनेयमश्वंगां वास आत्मानं तव पूरुष|	steed cow and garment may i win win back thy very self o man.
अश्वत्थे वो निषदनं पर्णे वो वसतिष कर्ता|	the holy fig tree is your home your mansion is the parna tree.
गोभाज इत्किलासथ यत सनवथ पूरुषम|	winners of cattle shali ye be if ye regain for me this man.
यत्रौषधीः समग्मत राजानः समिताविव|	he who hath store of herbs at hand like kings amid a crowd of men.
विप्रः सौच्यते भिषग रक्षोहामीवचातनः|	physician is that sages name fiendslayer chaser of disease.
अश्वावतीं सोमावतीमूर्जयन्तीमुदोजसम|	herbs rich in soma rich in steeds in nourishments in strengthening power.
आवित्सिसर्वा ओषधीरस्मा अरिष्टतातये|	all these have i provided here that this man may be whole again.
उच्छुष्मा ओषधीनां गावो गोष्ठादिवेरते|	the healing virtues of the plants stream forth like cattle from the stall.
धनंसनिष्यन्तीनामात्मानं तव पूरुष|	plants that shall win me store of wealth and save thy vital breath o man.
इष्क्र्तिर्नाम वो माताथो यूयं सथ निष्क्र्तीः|	reliever is your mothers name and hence restorers are ye called.
सीराःपतत्र्णी सथन यदामयति निष कर्थ|	rivers are ye with wings that fly keep far whatever brings disease.
अति विश्वाः परिष्ठा सतेन इव वरजमक्रमुः|	over all fences have they passed as steals a thief into the fold.
ओषधीःप्राचुच्यवुर्यत किं च तन्वो रपः|	the plants have driven from the frame whatever malady was there.
यदिमा वाजयन्नहमोषधीर्हस्त आदधे|	when bringing back the vanished strength i hold these herbs within my hand.
आत्मायक्ष्मस्य नश्यति पुरा जीवग्र्भो यथा|	the spirit of disease departs ere he can seize upon the life.
यस्यौषधीः परसर्पथाङगमअञ्गं परुषपरुः|	he through whose frame o plants ye creep member by member joint by joint.
ततोयक्ष्मं वि बाधध्व उग्रो मध्यमशीरिव|	from him ye drive away disease like some strong arbiter of strife.
साकं यक्ष्म पर पत चाषेण किकिदीविना|	fly spirit of disease begone with the blue jay and kingfisher.
साकंवातस्य धराज्या साकं नश्य निहाकया|	fly with the winds impetuousspeed vanish together with the storm.
अन्या वो अन्यामवत्वन्यान्यस्या उपावत|	help every one the other lend assistance each of you to each.
ताः सर्वाःसंविदाना इदं मे परावता वचः|	all of you be accordant give furtherance to this speech of mine.
याः फलिनीर्या अफला अपुष्पा याश्च पुष्पिणीः|	let fruitful plants and fruitless those that blossom and the blossomless.
बर्हस्पतिप्रसूतास्ता नो मुञ्चन्त्वंहसः|	urged onward by bṛhaspati release us from our pain and grief.
मुञ्चन्तु मा शपथ्यादथो वरुण्यादुत|	release me from the curses plague and woe that comes from varuṇa.
अथो यमस्यपड्बीशात सर्वस्माद देवकिल्बिषात|	free me from yamas fetter from sin and offence against the gods.
अवपतन्तीरवदन दिव ओषधयस परि|	what time descending from the sky the plants flew earthward thus they spake.
यं जीवमश्नवामहै न स रिष्याति पूरुषः|	no evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth we pervade.
या ओषधीः सोमराज्ञीर्बह्वीः शतविचक्षणाः|	of all the many plants whose king is soma plants of hundred forms.
तासां तवमस्युत्तमारं कामाय शं हर्दे|	thou art the plant most excellent prompt to the wish sweet to the heart.
या ओषधीः सोमराज्ञीर्विष्ठिताः पर्थिवीमनु|	o all ye various herbs whose king is soma that oerspread the earth.
बर्हस्पतिप्रसूता अस्यै सं दत्त वीर्यम|	urged onward by bṛhaspati combine your virtue in this plant.
मा वो रिषत खनिता यस्मै चाहं खनामि वः|	unharmed be he who digs you up unharmed the man for whom i dig.
दविपच्चतुष्पदस्माकं सर्वमस्त्वनातुरम|	and let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours.
याश्चेदमुपश्र्ण्वन्ति याश्च दूरं परागताः|	all plants that hear this speech and those that have departed far away.
सर्वाः संगत्य वीरुधोअस्यै सं दत्त वीर्यम|	come all assembled and confer your healing power upon this herb.
ओषधयः सं वदन्ते सोमेन सह राज्ञा|	with soma as their sovran lord the plants hold colloquy and say.
यस्मै कर्णोतिब्राह्मणस्तं राजन पारयामसि|	o king we save from death the man whose cure a brahman undertakes.
तवमुत्तमास्योषधे तव वर्क्षा उपस्तयः|	most excellent of all art thou o plant thy vassals are the trees.
उपस्तिरस्तुसोअस्माकं यो अस्मानभिदासति|	let him be subject to our power the man who seeks to injure us.
उत तिष्ठताव पश्यतेन्द्रस्य भागं रत्वियम|	now lift ye up yourselves and look on indras seasonable share.
यदि शरातोजुहोतन यद्यश्रातो ममत्तन|	if it be ready offer it unready ye have been remise.
शरातं हविरो षविन्द्र पर याहि जगाम सूरो अध्वनोविमध्यम|	oblation is prepared come to us indra the sun hath travelled over half his journey.
परि तवासते निधिभिः सखायः कुलपा नव्राजपतिं चरन्तम|	friends with their stores are sitting round thee waiting like lords of clans for the tribes wandering chieftain.
शरातं मन्य ऊधनि शरातमग्नौ सुश्रातं मन्ये तद्र्तं नवीयः|	dressed in the udder and on fire i fancy welldressed i fancy is this recent present.
माध्यन्दिनस्य सवनस्य दध्नः पिबेन्द्रवज्रिन पुरुक्र्ज्जुषाणः|	drink indra of the curd of noons libation with favour thunderer thou whose deeds are mighty.
इमा नु कं भुवना सीषधामेन्द्रश्च विश्वे च देवाः|	we will with indra and all gods to aid us bring these existing worlds into subjection.
यज्ञं च नस्तन्वं च परजां चादित्यैरिन्द्रः सहचीक्ळिपाति|	our sacrifice our bodies and our offspr let indra form together with Ādityas.
आदित्यैरिन्द्रः सगणो मरुद्भिरस्माकं भूत्ववितातनूनाम|	with the Ādityas with the band of maruts may indra be protector of our bodies.
हत्वाय देवा असुरान यदायन देवा देवत्वमभिरक्षमाणाः|	as when the gods came after they had slaughtered the asuras keeping safe their godlike nature.
परत्यञ्चमर्कमनयञ्छचीभिरादित सवधामिषिराम्पर्यपश्यन|	brought the sun hitherward with mighty powers and looked about them on their vigorous godhead.
शरद्धयाग्निः समिध्यते शरद्धय हुयते हविः|	by faith is agni kindled through faith is oblation offered up.
शरद्धां भगस्य मूर्धनि वचसा वेदयमसि|	we celebrate with praises faith upon the height of happiness.
परियं शरद्धे ददतः परियं शरद्द्ते दिदासतः|	bless thou the man who gives o faith faith bless the man who fain would give.
परियम्भोजेषु यज्वस्विदं म उदितं कर्धि|	bless thou the liberal worshippers bless thou the word that i have said.
यथा देव असुरेषु शरद्धामुग्रेषु चक्रिरे|	even as the deities maintained faith in the mighty asuras.
एवम्भोजेषु यज्वस्वस्माकमुदितं कर्धि|	so make this uttered wish of mine true for the liberal worshippers.
शरद्धां देवा यजमाना वायुगोपा उपासते|	guarded by vāyu gods and men who sacrifice draw near to faith.
शरद्धांह्र्दय्ययाकूत्या शरद्धया विन्दते वसु|	man winneth faith by yearnings of the heart and opulence by faith.
शरद्धां परातै हवामहे शरद्धां मध्यन्दिनं परि|	faith in the early morning faith at noonday will we invocate.
शरद्धां सूर्यस्य निम्रुचि शरद्धे शरद धापयेह नः|	faith at the setting of the sun o faith endow us with belief.
उदप्रुतो न वयो रक्षमाणा वावदतो अभ्रियस्येव घोषाः|	like birds who keep their watch plashing in water like the loud voices of the thundering raincloud.
गिरिभ्रजो नोर्मयो मदन्तो बर्हस्पतिमभ्यर्का अनावन|	like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain thus to bṛhaspati our hymns have sounded.
सं गोभिराङगिरसो नक्षमाणो भग इवेदर्यमणंनिनाय|	the son of aṅgirases meeting the cattle as bhaga brought in aryaman among us.
जने मित्रो न दम्पती अनक्ति बर्हस्पतेवाजयाशून्रिवाजौ|	as friend of men he decks the wife and husband as for the race bṛhaspati nerve our coursers.
साध्वर्या अतिथिनीरिषिरा सपार्हाः सुवर्णानवद्यरूपाः|	bṛhaspati having won them from the mountains strewed down like barley out of winnowing baskets.
बर्हस्पतिः पर्वते भयो वितूर्या निर्गाूपे यवमिव सथिविभ्यः|	the vigorous wandering cows who aid the pious desired of all of blameless form wellcoloured.
आप्रुषायन मधुन रतस्य योनिमवक्षिपन्नर्क उल्कामिवद्योः|	as the sun dews with meath the seat of order and casts a flaming meteor down from heaven.
बर्हस्पतिरुद्धरन्नश्मनो गा भूम्या उद्नेव वित्वचं बिभेद|	so from the rock bṛhaspati forced the cattle and cleft the earths skin as it were with water.
अप जयोतिषा तमो अन्तरिक्षादुद्नः शीपालमिव वाताजत|	forth from mid air with light he dravc the darkness as the gale blows a lily from the fiver.
बर्हस्पतिरनुम्र्श्या वलस्याभ्रमिव वात आ चक्रा गाः|	like the wind grasping at the cloud of vala bṛhaspati gathered to himself the cattle.
यदा वलस्य पीयतो जसुं भेद बर्हस्पतिरग्नितपोभिरर्कैः|	bṛhaspati when he with fiery lightnings cleft through the weapon of reviling vala.
दद्भिर्न जिह्वा परिविष्टमाददाविर्निधीन्रक्र्णोदुस्रियाणाम|	consumedḥim as tongues cat what teeth have compassed he threw the prisons of the red cows open.
बर्हस्पतिरमत हि तयदासां नाम सवरीणां सदनेगुहा यत|	that secret name borne by the lowing cattle within the cave bṛhaspati discovered.
आण्डेव भित्त्वा शकुनस्य गर्भमुदुस्रियाःपर्वतस्य तमनाजत|	and drave himself the bright kine from the mountain like a birds young after the eggs disclosure.
अश्नापिनद्धं मधु पर्यपश्यन मत्स्यं न दीन उदनिक्षियन्तम|	he looked around on rockimprisoned sweetness as one who eyes a fish in scanty water.
निष टज्जभार चमसं न वर्क्षाद्ब्र्हस्पतिर्विरवेणा विक्र्त्य|	bṛhaspati cleaving through with varied clamour brought it forth like a bowl from out the timber.
सोषामविन्दत स सवः सो अग्निं सो अर्केण वि बबाधेतमांसि|	he found the light of heaven and fire and morning with lucid rays he forced apart the darkness.
बर्हस्पतिर्गोवपुषो वलस्य निर्मज्जानं नपर्वणो जभार|	as from a joint bṛhaspati took the marrow of vala as he gloried in his cattle.
हिमेव पर्णा मुषिता वनानि बर्हस्पतिनाक्र्पयद वलो गाः|	as trees for foliage robbed by winter vala mourned for the cows bṛhaspati had taken.
अनानुक्र्त्यमपुनश्चकार यात सूर्यामासा मिथौच्चरातः|	he did a deed neer done neer to be equalled whereby the sun and moon ascend alternate.
अभि शयावं न कर्शनेभिरश्वं नक्षत्रेभिः पितरोद्यामपिंशन|	like a dark steed adorned with pearl the fathers have decorated heaven with constellations.
रात्र्यां तमो अदधुर्ज्योतिरहन्ब्र्हस्पतिर्भिनदद्रिं विदद गाः|	they set the light in day in night the darkness bṛhaspati cleft the rock and found the cattle.
इदमकर्म नमो अभ्रियाय यः पूर्वीरन्वानोनवीति|	this homage have weoffered to the cloud god who thunders out to many in succession.
बर्हस्पतिः स हि गोभिः सो अश्वैः स वीरेभिः सन्र्भिर्नो वयो धात|	may this bṛhaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with kine and horses men and heroes.
इमां धियं सप्तशीर्ष्णीं पिता न रतप्रजातां बर्हतीमविन्दत|	this holy hymn sublime and sevenheaded sprung from eternal law our sire discovered.
तुरीयं सविज्जनयद विश्वजन्योअयास्य उक्थमिन्द्राय शंसन|	ayasya friend of all men hath engendered the fourth hymn as he sang his laud to indra.
रतं शंसन्त रजु दीध्याना दिवस पुत्रासो असुरस्यवीराः|	thinking aright praising eternal order the sons of dyaus the asura those heroes.
विप्रं पदमङगिरसो दधाना यज्ञस्य धामप्रथमं मनन्त|	aṅgirases holding the rank of sages first honoured sacrifices holy statute.
हंसैरिव सखिभिर्वावदद्भिरश्मन्मयानि नहनाव्यस्यन|	girt by his friends who cried with swanlike voices bursting the stony barriers of the prison.
बर्हस्पतिरभिकनिक्रदद गा उत परास्तौदुच्चविद्वानगायत|	bṛhaspati spake in thunder to the cattle and uttered praise and song when he had found them.
अवो दवाभ्यां पर एकया गा गुहा तिष्ठन्तीरन्र्तस्यसेतौ|	apart from one away from two above him he drave the kine that stood in bonds of falsehood.
बर्हस्पतिस्तमसि जयोतिरिछन्नुदुस्रा आकर्विहि तिस्र आवः|	bṛhaspati seeking light amid the darkness drave forth the bright cows three he made apparent.
विभिद्या पुरं शयाथेमपाचीं निस्त्रीणि साकमुदधेरक्र्न्तत|	when he had cleft the lairs and western castle he cut off three from him who held the waters.
बर्हस्पतिरुषसं सूर्यं गामर्कंविवेद सतनयन्निव दयौः|	bṛhaspati discovered while he thundered like dyaus the dawn the sun the cow the lightning.
इन्द्रो वलं रक्षितारं दुघानां करेणेव वि चकर्तारवेण|	as with a hand so with his roaring indra cleft vala through the guardian of the cattle.
सवेदाञ्जिभिराशिरमिछमानोअरोदयत पणिमागा अमुष्णात|	seeking the milkdraught with sweatshining comrades he stole the paṇis kine and left him weeping.
स ईं सत्येभिः सखिभिः शुचद्भिर्गोधायसं विधनसैरदर्दः|	he with bright faithful friends winners of booty hath rent the milker of the cows asunder.
बरह्मणस पतिर्व्र्षभिर्वराहैर्घर्मस्वेदेभिर्द्रविणं वयानट|	bṛhaspati with wild boars strong and mighty sweating with heat hath gained a rich possession.
ते सत्येन मनसा गोपतिं गा इयानास इषणयन्तधीभिः|	they longing for the kine with faithful spirit incited with their hymns the lord of cattle.
बर्हस्पतिर्मिथोवद्यपेभिरुदुस्रिया अस्र्जतस्वयुग्भिः|	bṛhaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades selfyoked averting shame from one another.
तं वर्धयन्तो मतिभिः शिवाभिः सिंअमिव नानदतंसधस्थे|	in our assembly with auspicious praises exalting him who roareth like a lion.
बर्हस्पतिं वर्षणं शूरसातौ भरेभरे अनुमदेम जिष्णुम|	maywe in every fight where heroes conquer rejoice in strong bṛhaspati the victor.
यदा वाजमसनद विश्वरूपमा दयामरुक्षदुत्तराणिसद्म|	when he had won him every sort of booty and gone to heaven and its most lofty mansions.
बर्हस्पतिं वर्षणं वर्धयन्तो नाना सन्तोबिभ्रतो जयोतिरासा|	men praised bṛhaspati the mighty bringing the light within their mouths from sundry places.
सत्यामाशिषं कर्णुता वयोधै कीरिं चिद धयवथस्वेभिरेवैः|	fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigour aid in your wonted manner even the humble.
पश्चा मर्धो अप भवन्तु विश्वास्तद्रोदसी शर्णुतं विश्वमिन्वे|	let all our foes be turned and driven backward hear this o heaven and earth ye allproducers.
इन्द्रो मह्ना महतो अर्णवस्य वि मूर्धानमभिनदर्बुदस्य|	indra with mighty strength cleft asunder the head of arbuda the watery monster.
अहन्नहिमरिणात सप्त सिन्धून देवैर्द्यावाप्र्थिवीप्रावतं नः|	slain ahi and set free the seven rivers o heaven and earth with all the gods protect us.
महत तदुल्बं सथविरं तदासीद येनाविष्टितःप्रविवेशिथापः|	large was that covering and firm of texture folded wherein thou enteredst the waters.
विश्वा अपश्यद बहुधा ते अग्ने जातवेदस्तन्वो देव एकः|	one deity alone o jātavedas agni saw all thy forms in sundry places.
को मा ददर्श कतमः स देवो यो मे तन्वो बहुधापर्यपश्यत|	what god hath seen me who of all their number clearly beheld my forms in many places.
कवाह मित्रावरुणा कषियन्त्यग्नेर्विस्वाःसमिधो देवयानीः|	where lie then all the sacred logs of agni that lead him godward varuṇa and mitra.
ऐछाम तवा बहुधा जातवेदः परविष्टमग्ने अप्स्वोषधीषु|	in many places agni jātavedas we sought thee hidden in the plants and waters.
तं तवा यमो अचिकेच्चित्रभानो दशान्तरुष्यादतिरोचमानम|	then yama marked thee god of wondrous splendour effulgent from thy tenfold secret dwelling.
होत्रादहं वरुण बिभ्यदायं नेदेव मा युनजन्नत्रदेवाः|	i fled in fear from sacrificial worship varuṇa lest the gods should thus engage me.
तस्य मे तन्वो बहुधा निविष्टा एतमर्थं नचिकेताहमग्निः|	thus were my forms laid down in many places this as my goal i agni saw before me.
एहि मनुर्देवयुर्यज्ञकामोअरंक्र्त्या तमसि कषेष्यग्ने|	come man is pious and would fain do worship he waits prepared in gloom thou agni dwellest.
सुगान पथः कर्णुहि देवयानान वह हव्यानिसुमनस्यमानः|	make pathways leading godward clear and easy and bear oblations with a kindly spirit.
अग्नेः पूर्वे भरातरो अर्थमेतं रथीवाध्वानमन्वावरीवुः|	this goal mine elder brothers erst selected as he who drives a car the way to travel.
तस्माद भिया वरुण दूरमायं गौरो नक्षेप्नोरविजे जयायाः|	sovaruṇa i fled afar through terror as flies the wildbull from an archers bowstring.
कुर्मस्त आयुरजरं यदग्ने यथा युक्तो जातवेदो नरिष्याः|	we give thee life unwasting jātavedas so that employed thou never shalt be injured.
अथा वहासि सुमनस्यमानो भागं देवेभ्योहविषः सुजात|	so nobly born shalt thou with kindly spirit bear to the gods their share of mens oblations.
परयाजान मे अनुयाजांश्च केवलानूर्जस्वन्तं हविषोदत्त भागम|	grant me the first oblations and the latter entire my forceful shares of holy presents.
घर्तं चापां पुरुषं चौषधीनामग्नेश्च दीर्घमायुरस्तु देवाः|	the soul of plants the fatness of the waters and let there be long life ye gods to agni.
तव परयाजा अनुयाजाश्च केवल ऊर्जस्वन्तो हविषः सन्तुभागाः|	thine be the first oblations and the latter entire thy forceful shares of holy presents.
तवाग्ने यज्ञोअयमस्तु सर्वस्तुभ्यं नमन्ताम्प्रदिशश्चतस्रः|	let all this sacrifice be thine o agni and let the worlds four regions how before thee.
अबुध्रमु तय इन्द्रवन्तो अग्नयो जयोतिर्भरन्त उषसोव्युष्टिषु|	these fires associate with indra are awake bringing their light when first the dawn begins to shine.
मही दयावाप्र्थिवी चेततामपोअद्यादेवानामव आ वर्णीमहे|	may heaven and earth great pair observe our holy work we claim for us this day the favour of the gods.
दिवस्प्र्थिव्योरव आ वर्णीमहे मातॄन सिन्धून पर्वताञ्छर्यणावतः|	yea for ourselves we claim the grace of heaven and earth of Śaryaṇāvān of the hills and mother streams.
अनागास्त्वं सूर्यमुषासमीमहे भद्रंसोमः सुवानो अद्या कर्णोतु नः|	for innocence we pray to sūrya and to dawn so may the flowing soma bring us bliss today.
दयावा नो अद्य पर्थिवी अनागसो मही तरायेतां सुवितायमातरा|	may the great twain the mothers heaven and earth this day preserve us free from sin for peace and happiness.
उषा उछन्त्यप बाधतामघं सवस्त्यग्निंसमिधानमीमहे|	may morning sending forth her light drive sin afar we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
इयं न उस्रा परथमा सुदेव्यं रेवत सनिभ्यो रेवती वयुछतु|	may this first dawn bring us the host of gracious gods rich may it richly shine for us who strive for wealth.
आरे मन्युं दुर्विदत्रस्य धीमहि सवस्त्यग्निंसमिधानमीमहे|	the wrath of the malignant may we keep afar we pray to kindled agni for feilicity.
पर याः सिस्रते सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिर्ज्योतिर्भरन्तीरुषसो वयुष्टिषु|	dawns who come forward with the bright beams of the sun and at your earliest flushing bring to us the light.
भद्रा नो अद्य शरवसे वयुछत सवस्त्यग्निं समिधानमीमहे|	shine ye on us today auspicious for renown we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
अनमीवा उषस आ चरन्तु न उदग्नयो जिहतां जयोतिषाब्र्हत|	free from all sickness may the mornings come to us and let our fires mount upward with a lofty blaze.
आयुक्षातामश्विना तूतुजिं रथं सवस्त्यग्निंसमिधानमीमहे|	the aśvin pair have harnessed their swiftmoving car we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
शरेष्ठं नो अद्य सवितर्वरेण्यं भागमा सुव स हिरत्नधा असि|	send us today a portion choice and excellent o savitar for thou art he who dealeth wealth.
रायो जनित्रीं धिषणामुप बरुवे सवस्त्यग्निं समिधानमीमहे|	i cry to dhiṣaṇā mother of opulence we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
पिपर्तु मा तद रतस्य परवाचनं देवानां यन मनुष्यामन्महि|	further me this declaring of eternal law the law of gods as we mortals acknowledge it.
विश्वा इदुस्रा सपळ उदेति सूर्यः सवस्त्यग्निं समिधानमीमहे|	the sun goes up beholding all the rays of morn we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
अद्वेषो अद्य बर्हिष सतरीमणि गराव्णां योगे मन्मनःसाध ईमहे|	this day we pray with innocence in strewing grass adjusting pressingstones and perfecting the hymn.
आदित्यानां शर्मणि सथा भुरण्यसि सवस्त्यग्निं समिधानमीमहे|	thou in the Ādityas keeping movest restlessly we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
आ नो बर्हिः सधमादे बर्हद दिवि देवानीळे सादयासप्त होतॄन|	to our great holy grass i bid the gods at morn to banquet and will seat them as the seven priests.
इन्द्रं मित्रं वरुणं सातये भगं सवस्त्यग्निं समिधानमीमहे|	varuṇa indra mitra bhaga for our gain we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
त आदित्या आ गता सर्वतातये वर्धे नो यज्ञमवतासजोषसः|	come hither o Ādityas for our perfect weal accordant help our sacrifice that we may thrive.
बर्हस्पतिं पूषणमश्विना भगं सवस्त्यग्निं समिधानमीमहे|	pūṣan bṛhaspati bhaga both aśvins and enkindled agni we implore for happiness.
तन नो देवा यछत सुप्रवाचनं छर्दिरादित्याः सुभरंन्र्पाय्यम|	Ādityas gods vouchsafe that this our home may be praiseworthy prosperous our heroes sure defence.
पश्वे तोकाय तनयाय जीवसे सवस्त्यग्निंसमिधानमीमहे|	for cattle for our sons for progeny for life we pray to kindled agni for felicity.
विश्वे अद्य मरुतो विश्व ऊती विश्वे भवन्त्वग्नयःसमिद्धाः|	this day may all the maruts all he near us with aid may all our fires be well enkindled.
विश्वे नो देवा अवसा गमन्तु विश्वमस्तुद्रविणं वाजो अस्मे|	may all gods come to us with gracious favour may spoil and wealth he ours and all possessions.
यं देवासोअवथ वाजसातौ यं तरायध्वे यं पिप्र्थात्यंहः|	he whom ye aid o deities in battle whom ye protect and rescue from affliction.
यो वो गोपीथे न भयस्य वेद ते सयामदेववीतये तुरासः|	who fears no danger at your milklibation such may we be to feast the gods ye mighty.
परावतो ये दिधिषन्त आप्यं मनुप्रीतासो जनिमाविवस्वतः|	may they who would assume kinship from far away vivasvāns generations dearly loved of men.
ययातेर्ये नहुष्यस्य बर्हिषि देवा आसते तेधि बरुवन्तु नः|	even the gods who sit upon the sacred grass of nahuṣas son yayāti bless and comfort us.
विश्वा हि वो नमस्यानि वन्द्या नामानि देवा उत यज्ञियानिवः|	for worthy of obeisance gods are all your names worthy of adoration and of sacrifice.
ये सथ जाता अदितेरब्ध्यस परि ये पर्थिव्यास्तेम इह शरुता हवम|	ye who were born from waters and from aditi and from the earth do ye here listen to my call.
येभ्यो माता मधुमत पिन्वते पयः पीयूषं दयौरदितिरद्रिबर्हाः|	i will rejoice in these Ādityas for my weal for whom the mother pours forth water rich in balm.
उक्थशुष्मान वर्षभरान सवप्नसस्तानादित्याननु मदा सवस्तये|	and dyaus the infinite firm as a rock sweet milkgods active strong through lauds whose might the bull upholds.
नर्चक्षसो अनिमिषन्तो अर्हणा बर्हद देवासो अम्र्तत्वमानशुः|	looking on men neer slumbering they by their deserts attained as gods to lofty immortality.
जयोतीरथा अहिमाया अनागसो दिवो वर्ष्माणंवसते सवस्तये|	borne on refulgent cars sinless with serpents powers they robe them for our welfare in the height of heaven.
सम्राजो ये सुव्र्धो यज्ञमाययुरपरिह्व्र्ता दधिरे दिविक्षयम|	great kings who bless us who have come to sacrifice who neer assailed have set their mansion in the sky.
ताना विवास नमसा सुव्र्क्तिभिर्महो आदित्यानदितिं सवस्तये|	these i invite with adoration and with hymns mighty Ādityas aditi for happiness.
को व सतोमं राधति यं जुजोषथ विश्वे देवासो मनुषोयति षठन|	who offereth to you the laud that ye accept o ye allgods of manu many as ye are.
को वोअध्वरं तुविजाता अरं करद यो नःपर्षदत्यंहः सवस्तये|	who mighty ones will prepare for you the sacrifice to bear us over trouble to felicity.
येभ्यो होत्रां परथमामायेजे मनुः समिद्धाग्निर्मनसासप्त होत्र्भिः|	ye to whom manu by seven priests with kindled fire offered the first oblation with his heart and soul.
त आदित्या अभयं शर्म यछत सुगा नःकर्त सुपथा सवस्तये|	vouchsafe us ye Ādityas sheitcr free from fear and make us good and easy paths to happiness.
य ईशिरे भुवनस्य परचेतसो विश्वस्य सथातुर्जगतश्चमन्तवः|	wise deities who have dominion oer the world ye thinkers over all that moves not and that moves.
ते नः कर्तादक्र्तादेनसस पर्यद्या देवासःपिप्र्ता सवस्तये|	save us from uncommitted and committed sin preserve us from all sin today for happiness.
भरेष्विन्द्रं सुहवं हवामहेअंहोमुचं सुक्र्तन्दैव्यं जनम|	in battles we invoke indra still swift to hear and all the holy host of heaven who banish grief.
अग्निं मित्रं वरुणं सातये भगन्द्यावाप्र्थिवी मरुतः सवस्तये|	agni mitra and varuṇa that we may gain dyays bhaga maruts prthivi for happiness.
सुत्रामाणं पर्थिवीं दयामनेहसं सुशर्माणमदितिंसुप्रणीतिम|	mightilysaving earth incomparable heaven the good guide aditi who gives secure defence.
दैवीं नावं सवरित्रामनागसमस्रवन्तीमा रुहेमा सवस्तये|	the welloared heavenly ship that lets no waters in free from defect will we ascend for happiness.
विश्वे यजत्रा अधि वोचतोतये तरायध्वं नो दुरेवायाभिह्रुतः|	bless us all holy ones that we may have your help guard and protect us from malignant injury.
सत्यया वो देवहूत्या हुवेम शर्ण्वतो देवावसे सवस्तये|	with fruitful invocation may we call on you gods who give ear to us for grace for happiness.
अपामीवामप विश्वामनाहुतिमपारातिं दुर्विदत्रामघायतः|	keep all disease afar and sordid sacrifice keep off the wicked mans malicious enmity.
आरे देवा दवेषो अस्मद युयोतनोरु णः शर्मयछता सवस्तये|	keep far away from us all hatred o ye gods and give us ample shelter for our happiness.
अरिष्टः स मर्तो विश्व एधते पर परजाभिर्जायतेधर्मणस परि|	untouched by any evil every mortal thrives and following the law spreads in his progeny.
यमादित्यासो नयथा सुनीतिभिरतिविश्वानि दुरिता सवस्तये|	whom ye with your good guidance o Ādityas lead safely through all his pain and grief to happiness.
यं देवासोअवथ वाजसातौ यं शूरसाता मरुतो हितेधने|	that which ye guard and grace in battle o ye gods ye maruts where the prize is wealth where heroes win.
परातर्यावाणं रथमिन्द्र सानसिमरिष्यन्तमारुहेमा सवस्तये|	that conquering car o indra that sets forth at dawn that never breaks may we ascend for happiness.
सवस्ति नः पथ्यासु धन्वसु सवस्त्यप्सु वर्जने सवर्वति|	vouchsafe us blessing in our paths and desert tracts blessing in waters and in battle for the light.
सवस्ति नः पुत्रक्र्थेषु योनिषु सवस्ति राये मरुतो दधातन|	blessing upon the wombs that bring male children forth and blessing o ye maruts for the gain of wealth.
सवस्तिरिद धि परपथे शरेष्ठा रेक्णस्वत्यभि यावाममेति|	the noblest svasti with abundant riches who comes to what is good by distant pathway.
सा नो अमा सो अरणे नि पातु सवावेशा भवतुदेवगोपा|	may she at home and far away preserve us and dwell with us under the gods protection.
एवा पलतेः सूनुरवीव्र्धद वो विश्व आदित्या अदितेमनीषी|	thus hatb the thoughtful sage the son of plati praised you o aditi and all Ādityas.
ईशानासो नरो अमर्त्येनास्तावि जनो दिव्योगयेन|	men are made rich by those who are immortal the heavenly folk have been extolled by gaya.
सुष्वाणास इन्द्र सतुमसि तवा ससवांसश्च तुविन्र्म्णवाजम|	when we have pressed the juice we laud thee indra and when most valorous we have won the booty.
आ नो भर सुवितं यस्य चाकन तमना तनासनुयाम तवोताः|	bring us prosperity as each desires it under thine own protection may we conquer.
रष्वस्त्वमिन्द्र शूर जातो दासीर्विशः सूर्येणसह्याः|	sublime from birth mayst thou o indra hero with sūrya overcome the dāsa races.
गुहा हितं गुह्यं गूळमप्सु बिभ्र्मसिप्रस्रवणे न सोमम|	as by a fountains side we bring the soma that lay concealed closehidden in the waters.
अर्यो वा गिरो अभ्यर्च विद्वान रषीणां विप्रः सुमतिंचकानः|	answer the votarys hymns for these thou knowest craving the Ṛṣis prayer thyself a singer.
ते सयाम ये रणयन्त सोमैरेनोत तुभ्यंरथोळ भक्षैः|	may we be they who take delight in somas these with sweet food for thee o chariotrider.
इमा बरह्मेन्द्र तुभ्यं शंसि दा नर्भ्यो नर्णां शूरशवः|	these holy prayers o indra have i sung thee grant to the men the strength of men thou hero.
तेभिर्भव सक्रतुर्येषु चाकन्नुत तरायस्वग्र्णत उत सतीन|	be of one mind with those in whom thou joyest keep thou the singers safe and their companions.
शरुधी हवमिन्द्र शूर पर्थ्या उत सतवसे वेन्यस्यार्कैः|	listen to pṛthis call heroic indra and be thou lauded by the hymns of venya.
आ यस्ते योनिं घर्तवन्तमस्वारूर्मिर्न निम्नैर्द्रवयन्त वक्वाः|	him who hath sung thee to thine oilrich dwelling whose rolling songs have sped thee like a torrent.
पतंगमक्तमसुरस्य मायया हर्दा पश्यन्ति मनसाविपश्चितः|	the sapient with their spirit and their mind behold the bird adorned with all an asuras magic might.
समुद्रे अन्तः कवयो वि चक्षते मरीचीनाम्पदमिछन्ति वेधसः|	sages observe him in the oceans inmost depth the wise disposers seek the station of his rays.
पतंगो वाचं मनसा बिभर्ति तां गन्धर्वोअवदद गर्भेन्तः|	the flying bird bears speech within his spirit erst the gandharva in the womb pronounced it.
तां दयोतमानां सवर्यं मनीषां रतस्य पदेकवयो नि पान्ति|	and at the seat of sacrifice the sages cherish this radiant heavenlybright invention.
अपश्यं गोपामनिपद्यमानमा च परा च पथिभिश्चरन्तम|	i saw the herdsman him who never resteth approaching and departing on his pathways.
स सध्रीचीः स विषूचीर्वसान आ वरीवर्तिभुवनेष्वन्तः|	he clothed in gathered and diffusive splendour within the worlds continually travels.
किमिछन्ती सरमा परेदमानड दूरे हयध्वा जगुरिःपराचैः|	what wish of saramā hath brought her hither the path leads far away to distant places.
कास्मेहितिः का परितक्म्यासीत कथं रसायातरः पयांसि|	what charge hast thou for us where turns thy journey how hast thou made thy way oer rasās waters.
इन्द्रस्य दूतीरिषिता चरामि मह इछन्ती पणयो निधीन्वः|	i come appointed messenger of indra seeking your ample stores of wealth o paṇis.
अतिष्कदो भियसा तन न आवत तथा रसाया अतरम्पयांसि|	this hath preserved me from the fear of crossing thus have i made my way oer rasās waters.
कीद्रंं इन्द्रः सरमे का दर्शीका यस्येदं दूतीरसरः पराकात|	what is that indra like what is his aspect whose envoy saramā from afar thou comest.
आ च गछान मित्रमेना दधामाथागवां गोपतिर्नो भवाति|	let him approach and we will show him friendship he shall be made the herdsman of our cattle.
नाहं तं वेद दभ्यं दभत स यस्येदं दूतीरसरं पराकात|	i know him safe from harm but he can punish who sent me hither from afar as envoy.
न तं गूहन्ति सरवतो गभीरा हतािन्द्रेण पणयः शयध्वे|	him rivers flowing with deep waters bide not low will ye be o paṇis slain by indra.
इमा गावः सरमे या ऐछः परि दिवो अन्तान सुभगेपतन्ती|	these are the kine which saramā thou seekest flying o blest one to the ends of heaven.
कस्त एना अव सर्जादयुध्व्युतास्माकमायुधासन्ति तिग्मा|	who will loose these for thee without a battle yea and sharppointed are our warlike weapons.
असेन्या वः पणयो वचांस्यनिषव्यास्तन्वः सन्तु पापीः|	even if your wicked bodies o ye paṇis were arrowproof your words are weak for wounding.
अध्र्ष्टो व एतवा अस्तु पन्था बर्हस्पतिर्व उभया नम्र्ळात|	and were the path to you as yet unmastered bṛhaspati in neither case will spare you.
अयं निधिः सरमे अद्रिबुध्नो गोभिरश्वेभिर्वसुभिर्न्य्र्ष्टः|	paved with the rock is this our treasurechamber filled full of precious things of kine and horses.
रक्षन्ति तं पणयो ये सुगोपा रेकु पदमलकमा जगन्थ|	these paṇis who are watchful keepers guard it in vain hast thou approached this lonely station.
एह गमन्न्र्षयः सोमशिता अयास्यो अङगिरसो नवग्वाः|	Ṛṣis will come inspirited with soma aṅgirases unwearied and navagvas.
त एतमूर्वं वि भजन्त गोनामथैतद वचः पणयोवमन्नित|	this stall of cattle will they part among them then will the paṇis wish these words unspoken.
एवा च तवं सरम आजगन्थ परबाधिता सहसा दैव्येन|	even thus o saramā hast thou come hither forced by celestial might to make the journey.
सवसारं तवा कर्णवै मा पुनर्गा अप ते गवां सुभगेभजाम|	turn thee not back for thou shalt be our sister o blest one we will give thee of the cattle.
नाहं वेद भरात्र्त्वं नो सवस्र्त्वमिन्द्रो विदुरङगिरसश्च घोराः|	brotherhood sisterhood i know not either the dread aṅgirases and indra know them.
गोकामा मे अछदयन यदायमपात इत पणयोवरीयः|	they seemed to long for kine when i departed hence into distance be ye gone o paṇis.
दूरमित पणयो वरीय उद गावो यन्तु मिनतीरतेन|	hence far away ye paṇis let the cattle lowing come forth as holy law commandeth.
बर्हस्पतिर्या अविन्दन निगूळाः सोमो गरावाण रषयश्च विप्राः|	kine which bṛhaspati and soma Ṛṣis sages and pressingstones have found when hidden.
हिरण्यगर्भः समवर्तताग्रे भूतस्य जातः पतिरेकासीत|	in the beginning rose hiranyagarbha born only lord of all created beings.
स दाधार पर्थिवीं दयामुतेमां कस्मै देवायहविषा विधेम|	he fixed and holdeth up this earth and heaven what god shall we adore with our oblation.
य आत्मदा बलदा यस्य विश्व उपासते परशिषं यस्यदेवाः|	giver of vital breath of power and vigour he whose commandments all the gods acknowledge.
यस्य छायाम्र्तं यस्य मर्त्युः कस्मै देवायहविषा विधेम|	the lord of death whose shade is life immortal what god shall we adore with our oblation.
यः पराणतो निमिषतो महित्वैक इद राजा जगतो बभूव|	who by his grandeur hath become sole ruler of all the moving world that breathes and slumbers.
य ईशे अस्य दविपदश्चतुष्पदः कस्मै देवाय हविषाविधेम|	he who is loord of men and lord of cattle what god shall we adore with our oblation.
यस्येमे हिमवन्तो महित्वा यस्य समुद्रं रसया सहाहुः|	his through his might are these snowcovered mountains and men call sea and rasā his possession.
यस्येमाः परदिशो यस्य बाहू कस्मै देवाय हविषाविधेम|	his arms are these his are these heavenly regions what god shall we adore with our oblation.
येन दयौरुग्रा पर्थिवी च दर्ळ्हा येन सव सतभितं येननाकः|	by him the heavens are strong and earth is stedfast by him lights realm and skyvault are supported.
यो अन्तरिक्षे रजसो विमानः कस्मै देवायहविषा विधेम|	by him the regions in midair were measured what god shall we adore with our oblation.
यं करन्दसी अवसा तस्तभाने अभ्यैक्षेतां मनसारेजमाने|	to him supported by his help two armies embattled look while trembling in their spirit.
यत्राधि सूर उदितो विभाति कस्मै देवायहविषा विधेम|	when over them the risen sun is shining what god shall we adore with our oblation.
आपो ह यद बर्हतीर्विश्वमायन गर्भं दधानाजनयन्तीरग्निम|	what time the mighty waters came containing the universal germ producing agni.
ततो देवानां समवर्ततासुरेकःकस्मै देवाय हविषा विधेम|	thence sprang the gods one spirit into being what god shall we adore with our oblation.
यश्चिदापो महिना पर्यपश्यद दक्षं दधानाजनयन्तीर्यज्ञम|	he in his might surveyed the floods containing productive force and generating worship.
यो देवेष्वधि देव एक आसीत कस्मैदेवाय हविषा विधेम|	he is the god of gods and none beside him what god shall we adore with our oblation.
मा नो हिंसीज्जनिता यः पर्थिव्या यो वा दिवंसत्यधर्मा जजान|	neer may he harm us who is earths begetter nor he whose laws are sure the heavens creator.
यश्चापश्चन्द्रा बर्हतीर्जजानकस्मै देवाय हविषा विधेम|	he who brought forth the great and lucid waters what god shall we adore with our oblation.
परजापते न तवदेतान्यन्यो विश्वा जातानि परि ताबभूव|	prajāpati thou only comprehendest all these created things and none beside thee.
यत्कामास्ते जुहुमस्तन नो अस्तु वयं सयाम पतयोरयीणाम|	grant us our hearts desire when we invoke thee may we have store of riches in possession.
वसूनां वा चर्क्र्ष इयक्षन धिया वा यज्ञैर्वारोदस्योः|	i am prepared to laud with song or worship the noble ones who are in earth and heaven.
अर्वन्तो वा ये रयिमन्तः सातौ वनुं वा येसुश्रुणं सुश्रुतो धुः|	or coursers who have triumphed in the contest or those who famed have won the prize with glory.
हव एषामसुरो नक्षत दयां शरवस्यता मनसा निंसतक्षा|	their call the call of gods went up to heaven they kissed the ground with gloryseeking spirit.
चक्षाणा यत्र सुविताय देवा दयौर्न वारेभिःक्र्णवन्त सवैः|	there where the gods look on for happy fortune and like the kindly heavens bestow their bounties.
इयमेषामम्र्तानां गीः सर्वताता ये कर्पणन्त रत्नम|	this is the song of those immortal beings who long for treasures in their full perfection.
धियं च यज्ञं च साधन्तस्ते नो धान्तु वसव्यमसामि|	may these completing prayers and sacrifices bestow upon us wealth where naught is wanting.
आ तत त इन्द्रायवः पनन्तभि य ऊर्वं गोमन्तन्तित्र्त्सान|	those living men extolled thy deed o indra those who would fain burst through the stall of cattle.
सक्र्त्स्वं ये पुरुपुत्रां महीं सहस्रधाराम्ब्र्हतीं दुदुक्षन|	fain to milk her who bare but once great lofty whose sons are many and her streams past number.
शचीव इन्द्रमवसे कर्णुध्वमनानतं दमयन्तं पर्तन्यून|	sacivan win to your assistance indra who never bends who overcomes his foemen.
रभुक्षणं मघवानं सुव्र्क्तिं भर्ता यो वज्रं नर्यम्पुरुक्षुः|	Ṛbhukṣan maghavan the hymns upholder who rich in food bears mans kind friend the thunder.
यद वावान पुरुतमं पुराषाळ आ वर्त्रहेन्द्रो नामान्यप्राः|	since he who won of old anew hath triumphed indra hath earned his name of vṛtraslaycr.
अचेति परासहस पतिस्तुविष्मान यदीमुश्मसिकर्तवे करत तत|	he hath appeared the mighty lord of conquest what we would have him do let him accomplish.
रतं च सत्यं चाभीद्धात तपसोअध्यजायत|	from fervour kindled to its height eternal law and truth were born.
ततोरात्र्यजायत ततः समुद्रो अर्णवः|	thence was the night produced and thence the billowy flood of sea arose.
समुद्रादर्णवादधि संवत्सरो अजायत|	from that same billowy flood of sea the year was afterwards produced.
अहोरात्राणिविदधद विश्वस्य मिषतो वशी|	ordainer of the days nights lord over all who close the eye.
सूर्याचन्द्रमसौ धाता यथापूर्वमकल्पयत|	dhātar the great creator then formed in due order sun and moon.
दिवं चप्र्थिवीं चान्तरिक्षमथो सवः|	he formed in order heaven and earth the regions of the air and light.
विष्णुर्योनिं कल्पयतु तवष्टा रूपाणि पिंशतु|	may viṣṇu form and mould the womb may tvaṣṭar duly shape the forms.
आसिञ्चतु परजापतिर्धाता गर्भं दधातु ते|	prajāpati infuse the stream and dhātar lay the germ for thee.
गर्भं धेहि सिनीवालि गर्भं धेहि सरस्वति|	o sinīvālī set the germ set thou the germ sarasvatī.
गर्भं तेश्विनौ देवावा धत्तां पुष्करस्रजा|	may the twain gods bestow the germ the aśvins crowned with lotuses.
हिरण्ययी अरणी यं निर्मन्थतो अश्विना|	that which the aśvins twain rub forth with the attritionsticks of gold.
तं तेगर्भं हवामहे दशमे मासि सूतवे|	that germ of thine we invocate that in the tenth month thou mayst bear.
हये जाये मनसा तिष्ठ घोरे वचांसि मिश्राक्र्णवावहै नु|	ho there my consort stay thou fiercesouled lady and let us reason for a while together.
न नौ मन्त्रा अनुदितास एते मयस करन्परतरे चनाहन|	such thoughts as these of ours while yet unspoken in days gone by have never brought us comfort.
किमेता वाचा कर्णवा तवाहं पराक्रमिषमुषसामग्रियेव|	what am i now to do with this thy saying i have gone from thee like the first of mornings.
पुरूरवः पुनरस्तं परेहि दुरापना वातैवाहमस्मि|	purūravas return thou to thy dwelling i like the wind am difficult to capture.
इषुर्न शरिय इषुधेरसना गोषाः शतसा न रंहिः|	like a shaft sent for glory from the quiver or swiftsteed winning cattle winning hundreds.
अवीरे करतौ वि दविद्युतन नोरा न मायुं चितयन्तधुनयः|	the lightning seemed to flash as cowards planned it the minstrels bleated like a lamb in trouble.
सा वसु दधती शवशुराय वय उषो यदि वष्ट्यन्तिग्र्हात|	giving her husbands father life and riches from the near dwelling when her lover craved her.
अस्तं ननक्षे यस्मिञ्चाकन दिवा नक्तंश्नथिता वैतसेन|	she sought the home wherein she found her pleasure accepting day and night her lords embraces.
तरिः सम माह्नः शनथयो वैतसेनोत सम मेअव्यत्यैप्र्णासि|	thrice in the day didst thou embrace thy consort though coldly she received thy fond caresses.
पुरूरवोअनु ते केतमायं राजा मे वीर तन्वस्तदासीः|	to thy desires purūravas i yielded so wast thou king o hero of my body.
या सुजूर्णिः शरेणिः सुम्नापिर्ह्रदेचक्षुर्न गरन्थिनीचरण्युः|	the maids sujirni sreni sumneapi charanyu granthini and hradecaksus.
ता अञ्जयोअरुणयो न सस्रुः शरिये गावो नधेनवोअनवन्त|	these like red kine have hastened forth the bright ones and like milchcows have lowed in emulation.
समस्मिञ जायमान आसत गना उतेमवर्धन नद्यःस्वगूर्ताः|	while he was born the dames sate down together the rivers with free kindness gave him nurture.
महे यत तवा पुरूरवो रणायावर्धयन्दस्युहत्याय देवाः|	and then purūravas the gods increased thee for mighty battle to destroy the dasyus.
सचा यदासु जहतीष्वत्कममानुषीषु मानुषो निषेवे|	when i a mortal wooed to mine embraces these heavenly nymphs who laid aside their raiment.
अप सम मत तरसन्ती न भुज्युस्ता अत्रसन रथस्प्र्शोनाश्वाः|	like a scared snake they fled from me in terror like chariot horses when the car has touched them.
यदासु मर्तो अम्र्तासु निस्प्र्क सं कषोणीभिः करतुभिर्नप्र्ङकते|	when loving these immortal ones the mortal hath converse with the nymphs as they allow him.
ता आतयो न तन्वः शुम्भत सवा अश्वासो नक्रीळयो दन्दशानाः|	like swans they show the beauty of their bodies like horses in their play they bite and nibble.
विद्युन न या पतन्ती दविद्योद भरन्ती मे अप्या काम्यानि|	she who flashed brilliant as the falling lightning brought me delicious presents from the waters.
जनिष्टो अपो नर्यः सुजातः परोर्वशी तिरत दीर्घमायुः|	now from the flood be born a strong young hero may uruvasi prolong her life for ever.
जज्ञिष इत्था गोपीथ्याय हि दधाथ तत पुरूरवो मोजः|	thy birth hath made me drink from earthly milchkine this power purūravas hast thou vouchsafed me.
अशासं तवा विदुषी सस्मिन्नहन न म आश्र्णोःकिमभुग वदासि|	i knew and warned thee on that day thou wouldst not hear me what sayest thou when naught avails thee.
कदा सूनुः पितरं जात इछाच्चक्रन नाश्रु वर्तयद्विजानन|	when will the son be born and seek his father mournerlike will he weep when first he knows him.
को दम्पती समनसा वि यूयोदध यदग्निःश्वशुरेषु दीदयत|	who shall divide the accordant wife and husband while fire is shining with thy consorts parents.
परति बरवाणि वर्तयते अश्रु चक्रन न करन्ददाध्येशिवायै|	i will console him when his tears are falling he shall not weep and cry for care that blesses.
पर तत ते हिनवा यत ते अस्मे परेह्यस्तं नहिमूर मापः|	that which is thine between us will i send thee go home again thou foolṭhou hast not won me.
सुदेवो अद्य परपतेदनाव्र्त परावतं परमां गन्तवा उ|	thy lover shall flee forth this day for ever to seek without return the farthest distance.
अधा शयीत निरतेरुपस्थेअधैनं वर्का रभसासोद्युः|	then let his bed be in destructions bosom and there let fierce rapacious wolves devour him.
पुरूरवो मा मर्था मा पर पप्तो मा तवा वर्कासो अशिवास उक्षन|	nay do not die purūravas nor vanish let not the evilomened wolves devour thee.
न वै सत्रैणानि सख्यानि सन्ति सालाव्र्काणांह्र्दयान्येता|	with women there can be no lasting friendship hearts of hyenas are the hearts of women.
यद विरूपाचरं मर्त्येष्ववसं रात्रीः शरदश्चतस्रः|	when amid men in altered shape i sojourned and through four autumns spent the nights among them.
घर्तस्य सतोकं सक्र्दह्न आश्नां तादेवेदन्तात्र्पाणा चरामि|	i tasted once a day a drop of butter and even now with that am i am contented.
अन्तरिक्षप्रां रजसो विमानीमुप शिक्षाम्युर्वशींवसिष्ठः|	i her best love call urvasi to meet me her who fills air and measures out the region.
उप तवा रातिः सुक्र्तस्य तिष्ठान नि वर्तस्वह्र्दयं तप्यते मे|	let the gift brought by piety approach thee turn thou to me again my heart is troubled.
इति तवा देवा इम आहुरैळ यथेमेतद भवसिम्र्त्युबन्धुः|	thus speak these gods to thee o son of iḷā as death hath verily got thee for his subject.
परजा ते देवान हविषा यजाति सवर्ग उ तवमपि मादयासे|	thy sons shall serve the gods with their oblation and thou moreover shalt rejoice in svarga.
विप्रासो न मन्मभिः सवाध्यो देवाव्यो न यज्ञैःस्वप्नसः|	ye by your hymns are like highthoughted singers skilful inviting gods with sacrifices.
राजानो न चित्राः सुसन्द्र्शः कषितीनां नमर्या अरेपसः|	fair to behold like kings with bright adornment like spotless gallants leaders of the people.
अग्निर्न ये भाजसा रुक्मवक्षसो वातासो न सवयुजःसद्यूतयः|	like fire with flashing flame breastbound with chains of gold like tempestblasts selfmoving swift to lend your aid.
परज्ञातारो न जयेष्ठाः सुनीतयःसुशर्माणो न सोमा रतं यते|	as best of all foreknowers excellent to guide like somas good to guard the man who follows law.
वातासो न ये धुनयो जिगत्नवोअग्नीनां न जिह्वाविरोकिणः|	shakers of all like gales of wind they travel like tongues of burning fires in their effulgence.
वर्मण्वन्तो न योधाः शिमीवन्तः पितॄणांन शंसाः सुरातयः|	mighty are they as warriors clad in armour and like the fathers prayers most bounteous givers.
रथानां न येअराः सनाभयो जिगीवांसो न शूराभिद्यवः|	like spokes of carwheels in one nave united ever victorious like heavenly heroes.
वरेयवो न मर्या घर्तप्रुषोअभिस्वर्तारोर्कं न सुष्टुभः|	shedding their precious balm like youthful suitors they raise their voice and chant their psalm as singers.
अश्वासो न ये जयेष्ठास आशवो दिधिषवो न रथ्यःसुदानवः|	they who are fleet to travel like the noblest steeds long to obtain the prize like bounteous charioteers.
आपो न निम्नैरुदभिर्जिगत्नवो विश्वरूपाङगिरसो न सामभिः|	like waters speeding on with their precipitous floods like omniform aṅgirases with sāmahymns.
गरावाणो न सूरयः सिन्धुमातर आदर्दिरासो अद्रयो नविश्वहा|	born from the stream like pressstones are the princes for ever like the stones that crush in pieces.
शिशूला न करीळयः सुमातरो महाग्रामो नयामन्नुत तविषा|	sons of a beauteous dame like playful children like a great host upon the march with splendour.
उषसां न केतवोअध्वरश्रियः शुभंयवो नाञ्जिभिर्व्यश्वितन|	like rays of dawn the visitors of sacrifice they shine with ornaments as eager to be bright.
सिन्धवो न ययियो भराजद्र्ष्टयः परावतो नयोजनानि ममिरे|	like rivers hasting on glittering with their spears from far away they measure out the distances.
सुभागान नो देवाः कर्णुता सुरत्नानस्मान सतोतॄन मरुतोवाव्र्धानाः|	gods send us happiness and make us wealthy letting us singers prosper o ye maruts.
अधि सतोत्रस्य सख्यस्य गात सनाद धि वोरत्नधेयानि सन्ति|	bethink you of our praise and of our friendship ye from of old have riches to vouchsafe us.
रात्री वयख्यदायती पुरुत्रा देव्यक्षभिः|	with all her eyes the goddess night looks forth approaching many a spot.
विश्वाधि शरियोअधित|	she hath put all her glories on.
ओर्वप्रा अमर्त्या निवतो देव्युद्वतः|	immortal she hath filled the waste the goddess hath filled height and depth.
जयोतिषा बाधतेतमः|	she conquers darkness with her light.
निरु सवसारमस्क्र्तोषसं देव्यायती|	the goddess as she comes hath set the dawn her sister in her place.
अपेदु हासतेतमः|	and then the darkness vanishes.
सा नो अद्य यस्या वयं नि ते यामन्न्नविक्ष्महि|	so favour us this night o thou whose pathways we have visited.
वर्क्षेन वसतिं वयः|	as birds their nest upon the tree.
नि गरामासो अविक्षत नि पद्वन्तो नि पक्षिणः|	the villagers have sought their homes and all that walks and all that flies.
निश्येनासश्चिदर्थिनः|	even the falcons fain for prey.
यावया वर्क्यं वर्कं यवय सतेनमूर्म्ये|	keep off the shewolf and the wolf o urmya keep the thief away.
अथा नःसुतरा भव|	easy be thou for us to pass.
उप मा पेपिशत तमः कर्ष्णं वयक्तमस्थित|	clearly hath she come nigh to me who decks the dark with richest hues.
उष रणेवयातय|	o morning cancel it like debts.
उप ते गा इवाकरं वर्णीष्व दुहितर्दिवः|	these have i brought to thee like kine o night thou child of heaven accept.
रात्रि सतोमंन जिग्युषे|	this laud as for a conqueror.
जग्र्भ्मा ते दक्षिणमिन्द्र हस्तं वसूयवो वसुपतेवसूनाम|	thy right hand have we grasped in ours o indra longing for treasure treasurelord of treasures.
विद्मा हि तवा गोपतिं शूर गोनामस्मभ्यंचित्रं वर्षणं रयिं दाः|	because we know thee hero lord of cattle vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
सवायुधं सववसं सुनीथं चतुःसमुद्रं धरुनंरयीणाम|	wealth fully armed good guard and kind protector sprung from four seas the prop and stay of treasures.
चर्क्र्त्यं शंस्यं भूरिवारमस्मभ्यंचित्रं वर्षणं रयिं दाः|	fraught with great bounties meet for praise and glory vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
सुब्रह्माणं देववन्तं बर्हन्तमुरुं गभीरं पर्थुबुध्नमिन्द्र|	wealth with good brahmans indra godattended high wide and deep arid based on broad foundations.
शरुतर्षिमुग्रमभिमातिषाहमस्मभ्यं चित्रंव्र्षणं रयिं दाः|	strong with famed Ṛṣis conquering our foemen vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
सनद्वाजं विप्रवीरं तरुत्रं धनस्प्र्तं शूशुवांसंसुदक्षम|	victorious winning strength with hero sages confirmed in power most useful wealthattracting.
दस्युहनं पूर्भिदमिन्द्र सत्यमस्मभ्यंचित्रं वर्षणं रयिं दाः|	true indra crushing forts and slaying dasyus vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
अश्वावन्तं रथिनं वीरवन्तं सहस्रिणं शतिनंवाजमिन्द्र|	wealthy in heroes and in cars and horses strength hundredfold and thousandfold o indra.
भद्रव्रातं विप्रवीरं सवर्षामस्मभ्यंचित्रं वर्षणं रयिं दाः|	with manly sages happy troops iightwinning vouchsafe us mighty and resplentdent riches.
पर सप्तगुं रतधीतिं सुमेधां बर्हस्पतिं मतिरछाजिगाति|	to saptagu the sage the holyminded to him bṛhaspati the song approaches.
य आङगिरसो नमसोपसद्योअस्मभ्यं चित्रंव्र्षणं रयिं दाः|	aṅgiras son who must be met with homage vouchsafe us mighty and reslendent riches.
वनीवानो मम दूतास इन्द्रं सतोमाश्चरन्ति सुमतीरियानाः|	my lauds like envoys craving lovingkindness go forth to indra with their strong entreaty.
हर्दिस्प्र्शो मनसा वच्यमाना अस्मभ्यं चित्रंव्र्षणं रयिं दाः|	moving his heart and uttered by my spirit vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
यत तवा यामि दद्धि तन न इन्द्र बर्हन्तं कषयमसमंजनानाम|	grant us the boon for which i pray o indra a spacious home unmatched among the people.
अभि तद दयावाप्र्थिवी गर्णीतामस्मभ्यंचित्रं वर्षणं रयिं दाः|	to this may heaven and earth accord approval vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
आयं गौः पर्श्निरक्रमीदसदन मातरं पुरः|	this spotted bull hath come and sat before the mother in the east.
पितरं च परयन सवः|	advancing to his father heaven.
अन्तश्चरति रोचनास्य पराणादपानती|	expiring when he draws his breath she moves along the lucid spheres.
वयख्यन्महिषो दिवम|	the bull shines out through all the sky.
तरिंशद धाम वि राजति वाक पतंगाय धीयते|	song is bestowed upon the bird it rules supreme through thirty realms.
परतिवस्तोरह दयुभिः|	throughout the days at break of morn.
चित्र इच्छिशोस्तरुणस्य वक्षथो न यो मातरावप्येतिधातवे|	verily wondrous is the tender younglings growth who never draweth nigh to drink his mothers milk.
अनूधा यदि जीजनदधा च नु ववक्ष सद्योमहि दूत्यं चरन|	as soon as she who hath no udder bore him he faring on his great errand suddenly grew strong.
अग्निर्ह नाम धायि दन्नपस्तमः सं यो वना युवतेभस्मना दता|	then agni was his name most active to bestow gathering up the trees with his consuming tooth.
अभिप्रमुरा जुह्वा सवध्वर इनो नप्रोथमानो यवसे वर्षा|	skilled in fair sacrifice armed with destroying tongue impetuous as a bull that snorteth in the mead.
तं वो विं न दरुषदं देवमन्धस इन्दुं परोथन्तम्प्रवपन्तमर्णवम|	praise him yourgod who birdlike rests upon a tree scattering drops of juice and pouring forth his flood.
आसा वह्निं न शोचिषा विरप्शिनम्महिव्रतं न सरजन्तमध्वनः|	speaking aloud with flame as with his lips a priest and broadening his paths like one of high command.
वि यस्य ते जरयसानस्याजर धक्षोर्न वाताः परि सन्त्यच्युताः|	thou everlasting whom farstriding fain to burn the winds uninterrupted never overcome.
आ रण्वासो युयुधयो न सत्वनं तरितंनशन्त पर शिषन्त इष्टये|	they have approached as warriors eager for the fight heroic trita guiding him to gain his wish.
स इदग्निः कन्व्वतमः कण्वसखार्यः परस्यान्तरस्यतरुषः|	this agni is the best of kaṇvas kaṇvas friend conqueror of the foe whether afar or near.
अग्निः पातु गर्णतो अग्निः सूरीनग्निर्ददातुतेषामवो नः|	may agni guard the singers guard the princes well may agni grant to us our princes gracious help.
वाजिन्तमाय सह्यसे सुपित्र्य तर्षु चयवानो अनु जातवेदसे|	do thou supitrya swiftly following make thyself the lord of jātavedas mightiest of all.
अनुद्रे चिद यो धर्षता वरं सते महिन्तमाय धन्वनेदविष्यते|	who surely gives a boon even in thirsty land most powerful prepared to aid us in the wilds.
एवाग्निर्मर्तैः सह सूरिभिर्वसु षटवे सहसः सूनरोन्र्भिः|	thus noble agni with princes and mortal men is lauded excellent for conquering strength with chiefs.
मित्रासो न ये सुधिता रतायवो दयावो न दयुम्नैरभि सन्ति मानुषान|	men who are welldisposed as friends and true to law even as the heavens in majesty surpass mankind.
ऊर्जो नपात सहसावन्निति तवोपस्तुतस्य वन्दते वर्षा वाक|	o son of strength victorious with this title upastutas most potent voice reveres thee.
तवां सतोषाम तवया सुवीरा दराघीय आयुः परतरन्दधानाः|	blest with brave sons by thee we will extol thee and lengthen out the days of our existence.
इति तवाग्ने वर्ष्टिहव्यस्य पुत्रा उपस्तुतास रषयोअवोचन|	thus agni have the sons of vrstihavya the Ṛṣis the upastutas invoked thee.
तांश्च पाहि गर्णतश्च सूरीन वषड वषळ इत्यूर्ध्वासो अनक्षन नमो नम इत्यूर्ध्वासो अनक्षन|	protect them guard the singers and the princes with vaṣaṭ have they come with hands uplifted with their uplifted hands and cries of glory.
वात आ वातु भेषजं शम्भु मयोभु नो हर्दे|	filling our hearts with health and joy may vāta breathe his balm on us.
पर णायूंषि तारिषत|	may he prolong our days of life.
उत वात पितासि न उत भरातोत नः सखा|	thou art our father vāta yea thou art a brother and a friend.
स नोजीवातवे कर्धि|	so give us strength that we may live.
यददो वात ते गर्हेअम्र्तस्य निधिर्हितः|	the store of amṛta laid away yonder o vāta in thine home.
ततो नो देहिजीवसे|	give us thereof that we may live.
य इमा विश्वा भुवनानि जुह्वद रषिर्होता नयसीदत्पिता नः|	he who sate down as hotarpriest the Ṛṣi our father offering up all things existing.
स आशिषा दरविणमिछमानः परथमछदवराना विवेश|	he seeking through his wish a great possession came among men on earth as archetypal.
किं सविदासीदधिष्ठनमारम्भणं कतमत सवित्कथासीत|	what was the place whereon he took his station what was it that supported him how was it.
यतो भूमिं जनयन विश्वकर्म वि दयामौर्णोन महिना विश्वचक्षाः|	whence visvakarman seeing all producing the earth with mighty power disclosed the heavens.
विश्वतश्चक्षुरुत विश्वतोमुखो विश्वतोबाहुरुतविश्वतस्पात|	he who hath eyes on all sides round about him a mouth on all sides arms and feet on all sides.
सं बाहुभ्यां धमति सं पतत्रैर्द्यावाभूमी जनयन देव एकः|	he the sole god producing earth and heaven weldeth them with his arms as wings together.
किं सविद वनं क उ स वर्क्ष आस यतो दयावाप्र्थिवीनिष्टतक्षुः|	what was the tree what wood in sooth produced it from which they fashioned out the earth and heaven.
मनीषिणो मनसा पर्छतेदु तद यदध्यतिष्ठद भुवनानि धारयन|	ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit whereon he stood when he established all things.
या ते धामानि परमाणि यावमा या मध्यमाविश्वकर्मन्नुतेमा|	nine highest lowest sacrificial natures and these thy midmost here o visvakarman.
शिक्षा सखिभ्यो हविषि सवधावःस्वयं यजस्व तन्वं वर्धानः|	teach thou thy friends at sacrifice o blessed and come thyself exalted to our worship.
विश्वकर्मन हविषा वाव्र्धानः सवयं यजस्व पर्थिवीमुत दयाम|	bring thou thyself exalted with oblation o visvakarman earth and heaven to worship.
मुह्यन्त्वन्ये अभितो जनास इहास्माकं मघवासूरिरस्तु|	let other men around us live in folly here let us have a rich and liberal patron.
वाचस पतिं विश्वकर्माणमूतये मनोजुवं वाजे अद्याहुवेम|	let us invoke today to aid our labour the lord of speech the thoughtswift visvakarman.
स नो विश्वानि हवनानि जोषद विश्वशम्भूरवसेसाधुकर्मा|	may he hear kindly all our invocations who gives all bliss for aid whose works are righteous.
अरण्यान्यरण्यान्यसौ या परेव नश्यसि|	goddess of wild and forest who seemest to vanish from the sight.
कथाग्रामं न पर्छसि न तवा भीरिव विन्दतीअअअन|	how is it that thou seekest not the village art thou not afraid.
वर्षारवाय वदते यदुपावति चिच्चिकः|	what time the grasshopper replies and swells the shrill cicalas voice.
आघाटिभिरिवधावयन्नरण्यानिर्महीयते|	seeming to sound with tinkling bells the lady of the wood exults.
उत गाव इवादन्त्युत वेश्मेव दर्श्यते|	and yonder cattle seem to graze what seems a dwellingplace appears.
उतो अरण्यानिःसायं शकटीरिव सर्जति|	or else at eve the lady of the forest seems to free the wains.
गामङगैष आ हवयति दार्वङगैषो अपावधीत|	here one is calling to his cow another there hath felled a tree.
वसन्नरण्यान्यां सायमक्रुक्षदिति मन्यते|	at eve the dweller in the wood fancies that somebody hath screamed.
न वा अरण्यानिर्हन्त्यन्यश्चेन नाभिगछति|	the goddess never slays unless some murderous enemy approach.
सवादोःफलस्य जग्ध्वाय यथाकामं नि पद्यते|	man eats of savoury fruit and then takes even as he wills his rest.
आञ्जनगन्धिं सुरभिं बह्वन्नामक्र्षीवलाम|	now have i praised the forest queen sweetscented redolent of balm.
पराहम्म्र्गाणां मातरमरण्यानिमशंसिषम|	the mother of all sylvan things who tills not but hath stores of food.
पर सु गमन्ता धियसानस्य सक्षणि वरेभिर्वरानभिषु परसीदतः|	forth speed the pair to bring the meditating god benevolent with boons sent in return for boons.
अस्माकमिन्द्र उभयं जुजोषति यत्सोम्यस्यान्धसो बुबोधति|	may indra graciously accept both gifts from us when he hath knowledge of the flowing soma juice.
वीन्द्र यासि दिव्यानि रोचना वि पार्थिवानि रजसापुरुष्टुत|	thou wanderest far o indra through the spheres of light and realms of earth the region thou whom many praise.
ये तवा वहन्ति मुहुरध्वरानुप ते सुवन्वन्तु वग्यनानराधसः|	let those who often bring their solemn rites conquer the noisy babblers who present no gifts.
तदिन मे छन्त्सत वपुषो वपुष्टरं पुत्रो यज्जानम्पित्रोरधीयति|	more beautiful than beauty must this seem to me when the son duly careth for his parents line.
जाया पतिं वहति वग्नुना सुमत पुंसैद भद्रो वहतुः परिष्क्र्तः|	the wife attracts the husband with a shout of joy the mans auspicious marriage is performed aright.
तदित सधस्थमभि चारु दीधय गावो यच्छासन्वहतुं न धेनवः|	this beauteous place of meeting have i looked upon where like milchcows the kine order the marriage train.
माता यन मन्तुर्यूथस्यपूर्व्याभि वाणस्य सप्तधातुरिज्जनः|	where the herds mother counts as first and best of all and round her are the seventoned people of the choir.
पर वोअछा रिरिचे देवयुष पदमेको रुद्रेभिर्यातितुर्वणिः|	the pious one hath reached your place before the rest one only moves victorious with the rudras band.
जरा वा येष्वम्र्तेषु दावने परि वूमेभ्यः सिञ्चता मधु|	to these your helpers pour our meath immortal gods with whom your song of praise hath power to win their gifts.
निधीयमानमपगूळमप्सु पर मे देवानां वरतपाुवाच|	he who maintains the laws of god informed me that thou wast lying hidden in the waters.
इन्द्रो विद्वाननु हि तवा चचक्ष तेनाहमग्नेनुशिष्ट आगाम|	indra who knoweth well beheld and showed thee by him instructed am i come o agni.
अक्षेत्रवित कषेत्रविदं हयप्राट स परैतिक्षेत्रविदानुशिष्टः|	the stranger asks the way of him who knows it taught by the skilful guide he travels onward.
एतद वै भद्रमनुशासनोस्योतस्रुतिं विन्दत्यञ्जसीनाम|	this is in truth the blessing of instruction he finds the path that leads directly forward.
अद्येदु पराणीदममन्निमाहापीव्र्तो अधयन मातुरूधः|	even now he breathed these days hath he remembered concealed he sucked the bosom of his mother.
एमेनमाप जरिमा युवानमहेळन वसुः सुमनाबभूव|	yet in his youth old age hath come upon him he hath grown gracious good and free from anger.
एतानि भद्रा कलश करियाम कुरुश्रवण ददतो मघानि|	o kalasa all these blessings will we bring them o kurusravana who give rich presents.
दान इद वो मघवानः सो अस्त्वयं च सोमो हर्दि यम्बिभर्मि|	may he o wealthy princes and this soma which i am bearing in my heart reward you.
इमां मे अग्ने समिधं जुषस्वेळस पदे परति हर्याघ्र्ताचीम|	enjoy o agni this my fuel welcome the oilfilled ladle where we pour libation.
वर्ष्मन पर्थिव्याः सुदिनत्वे अह्नामूर्ध्वोभव सुक्रतो देवयज्या|	rise up for worship of the gods wise agni on the earths height while days are bright with beauty.
आ देवानामग्रयावेह यातु नराशंसो विश्वरूपेभिरश्वैः|	may he who goes before the gods come hither with steeds whose shapes are varied narasarhsa.
रतस्य पथा नमसा मियेधो देवेभ्यो देवतमःसुषूदत|	may he most godlike speed our offered viands with homage godward on the path of order.
शश्वत्तममीळते दूत्याय हविष्मन्तो मनुष्यासो अग्निम|	men with oblations laud most constant agni and pray him to perform an envoys duty.
वहिष्ठैरश्वैः सुव्र्ता रथेना देवान वक्षि निषदेह होता|	with lightlyrolling car and best draughthorses bring the gods hither and sit down as hotar.
वि परथतां देवजुष्टं तिरश्चा दीर्घं दराघ्मासुरभि भूत्वस्मे|	may the delight of gods spread out transversely may it be with us long in length and fragrant.
अहेळता मनसा देव बर्हिरिन्द्रज्येष्ठानुशतो यक्षि देवान|	o holy grass divine with friendly spirit bring thou the willing gods whose chief is indra.
दिवो वा सानु सप्र्शता वरीयः पर्थिव्या वा मात्रया विश्रयध्वम|	touch ye the farextending height of heaven or spring apart to suit the wide earths measure.
उशतीर्द्वारो महिना महद्भिर्देवं रथंरथयुर्धारयध्वम|	yearning ye doors with those sublime in greatness seize eagerly the heavenly car that cometh.
देवी दिवो दुहितरा सुशिल्पे उषासानक्ता सदतां नियोनौ|	here in this shrine may dawn and night the daughters of heaven the skilful goddesses be seated.
आ वां देवास उशती उशन्त उरौ सीदन्तु सुभगेुपस्थे|	in your wide lap auspicious willing ladies may the gods seat them with a willing spirit.
ऊर्ध्वो गरावा बर्हदग्निः समिद्धः परिया धामान्यदितेरुपस्थे|	up stands the stone high burns the fire enkindled aditis lap contains the friendly natures.
पुरोहिताव रत्विजा यज्ञे अस्मिन विदुष्टराद्रविणमा यजेथाम|	ye two chief priests who serve at this our worship may ye more skilled win for us rich possessions.
तिस्रो देवीर्बर्हिरिदं वरीय आ सीदत चक्र्मा वःस्योनम|	on our wide grass three goddesses be seated for you have we prepared and made it pleasant.
मनुष्वद यज्ञं सुधिता हवींषीळा देवीघ्र्तपदी जुषन्त|	may iḷā she whose foot drops oil the goddess taste manlike sacrifice and wellset presents.
देव तवष्टर्यद ध चारुत्वमानड यदङगिरसामभवः सचाभूः|	since thou god tvaṣṭar hast made beauty perfect since hou hast been the aṅgirases companion.
स देवानां पाथ उप पर विद्वानुशन यक्षि दरविणोदः सुरत्नः|	willing most wealthy giver of possessions grant us the gods assembly thou who knowest.
वनस्पते रशनया नियूया देवानां पाथ उप वक्षिविद्वान|	wellknowing binding with thy cord bring hither lord of the wood the deities assembly.
सवदाति देवः कर्णवद धवींष्यवतान्द्यावाप्र्थिवी हवं मे|	the god prepare and season our oblations may heaven and earth be gracious to my calling.
आग्ने वह वरुणमिष्टये न इन्द्रं दिवो मरुतोन्तरिक्षात|	agni bring hither varuṇa to help us indra from heaven from airs midrealm the maruts.
सीदन्तु बर्हिर्विश्व आ यजत्राः सवाहादेवा अम्र्ता मादयन्ताम|	on sacred grass all holy ones be seated and let the immortal gods rejoice in svāhā.
बरह्मणाग्निः संविदानो रक्षोहा बाधतामितः|	may agni yielding to our prayer the rakṣasslayer drive away.
अमीवायस्ते गर्भं दुर्णामा योनिमाशये|	the malady of evil name that hath beset thy labouring womb.
यस्ते गर्भममीवा दुर्णामा योनिमाशये|	agni concurring in the prayer drive off the eater of the flesh.
अग्निष टम्ब्रह्मणा सह निष करव्यादमनीनशत|	the malady of evil name that hath attacked thy babe and womb.
यस्ते हन्ति पतयन्तं निषत्स्नुं यः सरीस्र्पम|	that which destroys the sinking germ the settled moving embryo.
जातंयस्ते जिघांसति तमितो नाशयामसि|	that which will kill the babe at birtheven this will we drive far away.
यस्त ऊरू विहरत्यन्तरा दम्पती शये|	that which divides thy legs that it may lie between the married pair.
योनिं योन्तरारेळि तमितो नाशयामसि|	that penetrates and licks thy sideeven this will we exterminate.
यस्त्वा भराता पतिर्भूत्वा जारो भूत्वा निपद्यते|	what rests by thee in borrowed form of brother lover or of lord.
परजां यस्ते जिघांसति तमितो नाशयामसि|	and would destroy thy progenyeven this will we exterminate.
यस्त्वा सवप्नेन तमसा मोहयित्वा निपद्यते|	that which through sleep or darkness hath deceived thee and lies down by thee.
परजां यस्ते जिघांसति तमितो नाशयामसि|	and will destroy thy progenyeven this will we exterminate.
मा पर गाम पथो वयं मा यज्ञादिन्द्र सोमिनः|	let us not indra leave the path the somapressers sacrifice.
मान्त सथुर्नो अरातयः|	let no malignity dwell with us.
यो यज्ञस्य परसाधनस्तन्तुर्देवेष्वाततः|	may we obtain completely wrought the thread spun out to reach the gods.
तमाहुतं नशीमहि|	that perfecteth the sacrifice.
मनो नवा हुवामहे नाराशंसेन सोमेन|	we call the spirit hither with the soma of our parted sires.
पितॄणां चमन्मभिः|	yea with the fathers holy hymns.
आ त एतु मनः पुनः करत्वे दक्षाय जीवसे|	thy spirit come to thee again for wisdom energy and lire.
जयोक चसूर्यं दर्शे|	that thou mayst long behold the sun.
पुनर्नः पितरो मनो ददातु दैव्यो जनः|	o fathers may the heavenly folk give us our spirit once again.
जीवं वरातंसचेमहि|	that we may be with those who live.
वयं सोम वरते तव मनस्तनूषु बिभ्रतः|	o soma with the spirit still within us blest with progeny.
परजावन्तः सचेमहि|	may we be busied in the law.
पर ते यक्षि पर त इयर्मि मन्म भुवो यथा वन्द्यो नोहवेषु|	to thee will send praise and bring oblation as thou hast merited lauds when we invoked thee.
धन्वन्निव परपा असि तवमग्न इयक्षवे पूरवेप्रत्न राजन|	a fountain in the desert art thou agni o ancient king to man who fain would worship.
यं तवा जनासो अभि संचरन्ति गाव उष्णमिव वरजंयविष्ठ|	thou unto whom resort the gathered people as the kine seek the warm stall o most youthful.
दूतो देवानामसि मर्त्यानामन्तर्महांश्चरसि रोचनेन|	thou art the messenger of gods and mortals and goest glorious with thy light between them.
शिशुं न तवा जेन्यं वर्धयन्ती माता बिभर्तिसचनस्यमाना|	making thee grow as twere some noble infant thy mother nurtures thee with sweet affection.
धनोरधि परवता यासि हर्यञ जिगीषसेपशुरिवावस्र्ष्टः|	over the desert slopes thou passest longing and seekest like some beast set free thy fodder.
मूरा अमूर न वयं चिकित्वो महित्वमग्ने तवमङग वित्से|	foolish are we o wise and free from error verily agni thou dost know thy grandeur.
शये वव्रिश्चरति जिह्वयादन रेरिह्यते युवतिंविश्पतिः सन|	there lies the form he moves and licks and swallows and as houselord kisses the youthful maiden.
कूचिज्जायते सनयासु नव्यो वने तस्थौ पलितो धूमकेतुः|	he rises ever fresh in ancient fuel smokebannered gray he makes the wood his dwelling.
अस्नातापो वर्षभो न पर वेति सचेतसो यं पर्णयन्तमर्ताः|	no swimmer steer he presses through the waters and to his place accordant mortals bear him.
तनूत्यजेव तस्करा वनर्गु रशनाभिर्दशभिरभ्यधीताम|	like thieves who risk their lives and haunt the forest the twain with their ten girdles have secured him.
इयं ते अग्ने नव्यसी मनीषा युक्ष्वा रथंन शुचयद्भिरङगैः|	this is a new hymn meant for thee o agni yoke as it were thy car with parts that glitter.
बरह्म च ते जातवेदो नमश्चेयं च गीः सदमिद्वर्धनी भूत|	homage and prayer are thine o jātavedas and this my song shall evermore exalt thee.
रक्षा णो अग्ने तनयानि तोका रक्षोत नस्तन्वो अप्रयुछन|	agni protect our children and descendants and guard with everwatcliful care our bodies.
पराग्नये वाचमीरय वर्षभाय कषितीनाम|	to agni send i forth my song to him the bull of all the folk.
स नःपर्षदति दविषः|	so may he bear us past our foes.
यः परस्याः परावतस्तिरो धन्वातिरोचते|	who from the distance far away shines brilliantly across the wastes.
स नःपर्षदति दविषः|	so may he bear us past our foes.
यो रक्षांसि निजूर्वति वर्षा शुक्रेण शोचिषा|	the bull with brightlygleaming flame who utterly consumes the fiends.
स नःपर्षदति दविषः|	so may he bear us past our foes.
यो विश्वाभि विपश्यति भुवना सं च पश्यति|	who looks on all existing things and comprehends them with his view.
स नःपर्षदति दविषः|	so may he bear us past our foes.
यो अस्य पारे रजसः शुक्रो अग्निरजायत|	resplendent agni who was born in farthest region of the air.
स नः पर्षदति दविषः|	so may he bear us past our foes.
